In the presence of a whole generation of contem- poraries, and of eye-witnesses
still living, it is difficult to understand how accounts of miracles so circum-
stantial as those contained in our Gospels, accom- panied with the proper names
of places and of persons, could have got themselves accredited, if the facts
had not been recognised as real. It is even impossible to conceive to oneself
how men could have dared to publish fictions of such a nature, so soon after
the supposed event. " To have made it possible," says Holtzmann, "for such
narratives to have been put into circulation and generally received, if they
were mere fictions, it would have been necessary for as many decenniums to have
passed away as there did in fact pass years, between the time of the life of
Jesus and the composition of our Gospels." Lectures in Defence of the Christian
Faith same in all, but, generally speaking, how great is the difference in the
details! The three narratives coincide perfectly only in regard to the words of
our Lord and of those who speak with Him. One might fancy oneself listening to
three messengers arriving from different directions, and recounting, each in
his own way, some event which they have all three just witnessed. Imagine a
case: A shipwreck has just occurred, in the presence of a whole population.
Three eye-witnesses give an account of it: one heard the sound of the breaking
of the mast under the blows of the tempest; another saw the sail fall upon the
deck and envelop the ill - fated sailors in its folds; the third saw the waves
force their way into breaches in the ship's sides. Each tells of the par-
ticular fact which happened to strike his own mind.  The three accounts do not
coincide perfectly, except when they report some energetic order of the
captain, or some heartrending cry of one of the victims. In this case, do not
even the discrepancies between the three narratives demonstrate the reality of
the facts reported ? Now, just such is the testimony of our first Gospels.
Their harmony regards the substance of the narrative, and their discrepancies
prove that this harmony is not of an artificial natureâ€”not the result of
calculation. They are first-hand, original narratives, which, complementing as
they do and even at times correcting one another, are mutually corroborative.
