The Rise and Fall of Cesar Birotteau handle of the pan and see how the fish are
frying.  Roguin himself, under the name of M. Charles Claparon, will be
joint-owner with me ; he will give a guarantee to each of his partners, and I
shall do the same with mine.  The deeds of purchase will be private deeds until
we have all the land in our hands. Roguin will look into it, and see which of
the purchases must be completed, for he is not sure that we can dispense with
intermediary registration, and yet transfer a separate title to the buyers when
we break up the estate into separate lots; but it would take too long to
explain it to you.  ' When the building land has been paid for, we shall have
nothing to do but fold our arms, and in three years' time we shall have a
million. Cesarine will be twenty years old, we shall have sold the business,
and then, God willing, we will go modestly towards greatness.' ' Well, but
where are the three hundred thousand francs to come from ?' asked Mme.
Birotteau.  ' My dear little woman, you know nothing of business.  There are
the hundred thousand francs in Roguin's hands ; I will pay them down. Then I
shall borrow forty thousand francs on the buildings and the land that our
factory standson, over in the Faubourg duTemple,and we have twenty thousand
francs in bills and acceptances in the portfolioâ€”altogether that makes a
hundred and sixty thousand francs. There remain a hundred and forty thousand
francs to be raised ; I will draw bills to the order of M. Charles Claparon the
banker ; he will advance the money, less the discount. And there are our three
hundred thousand francs: and you don't owe an account until it is due. When the
bills fall due, we shall be ready for them, with the profits of the business.
If we should find any difficulty in meeting them, Roguin would lend me the
money at five per cent. on a mortgage on my share of the building land. But
there is no need to borrow.
