With that the good man Gallet held his peace, but Picrochole to all his
discourse answered nothing but Come and fetch them, come and fetch them, —they
have ballocks fair and soft,—they will knead and provide some cakes for you.
Then returned he to Grangousier, whom he found upon his knees bareheaded,
crouching in a little corner of his cabinet, and humbly praying unto God that
he would vouchsafe to assuage the choler of Picrochole, and bring him to the
rule of reason without proceeding by force. When the good man came back, he
asked him, Ha, my friend, what news do you bring me? There is neither hope nor
remedy, said Gallet; the man is quite out of his wits, and forsaken of God.
Yea, but, said Grangousier, my friend, what cause doth he pretend for his
outrages? He did not show me any cause at all, said Gallet, only that in a
great anger he spoke some words of cakes. I cannot tell if they have done any
wrong to his cake-bakers. I will know, said Grangousier, the matter thoroughly,
before I resolve any more upon what is to be done. Then sent he to learn
concerning that business, and found by true information that his men had taken
violently some cakes from Picrochole's people, and that Marquet's head was
broken with a slacky or short cudgel; that, nevertheless, all was well paid,
and that the said Marquet had first hurt Forgier with a stroke of his whip
athwart the legs. And it seemed good to his whole council, that he should
defend himself with all his might. Notwithstanding all this, said Grangousier,
seeing the question is but about a few cakes, I will labour to content him; for
I am very unwilling to wage war against him. He inquired then what quantity of
cakes they had taken away, and understanding that it was but some four or five
dozen, he commanded five cartloads of them to be baked that same night; and
that there should be one full of cakes made with fine butter, fine yolks of
eggs, fine saffron, and fine spice, to be bestowed upon Marquet, unto whom
likewise he directed to be given seven hundred thousand and three Philips (that
is, at three shillings the piece, one hundred five thousand pounds and nine
shillings of English money), for reparation of his losses and hindrances, and
for satisfaction of the chirurgeon that had dressed his wound; and furthermore
settled upon him and his for ever in freehold the apple-orchard called La
Pomardiere. For the conveyance and passing of all which was sent Gallet, who by
the way as they went made them gather near the willow-trees great store of
boughs, canes, and reeds, wherewith all the carriers were enjoined to garnish
and deck their carts, and each of them to carry one in his hand, as himself
likewise did, thereby to give all men to understand that they demanded but
peace, and that they came to buy it.  Being come to the gate, they required to
speak with Picrochole from Grangousier. Picrochole would not so much as let
them in, nor go to speak with them, but sent them word that he was busy, and
that they should deliver their mind to Captain Touquedillon, who was then
planting a piece of ordnance upon the wall. Then said the good man unto him, My
lord, to ease you of all this labour, and to take away all excuses why you may
not return unto our former alliance, we do here presently restore unto you the
cakes upon which the quarrel arose. Five dozen did our people take away: they
were well paid for: we love peace so well that we restore unto you five
cartloads, of which this cart shall be for Marquet, who doth most complain.
Besides, to content him entirely, here are seven hundred thousand and three
Philips, which I deliver to him, and, for the losses he may pretend to have
sustained, I resign for ever the farm of the Pomardiere, to be possessed in
fee-simple by him and his for ever, without the payment of any duty, or
acknowledgement of homage, fealty, fine, or service whatsoever, and here is the
tenour of the deed. And, for God's sake, let us live henceforward in peace, and
withdraw yourselves merrily into your own country from within this place, unto
which you have no right at all, as yourselves must needs confess, and let us be
good friends as before. Touquedillon related all this to Picrochole, and more
and more exasperated his courage, saying to him, These clowns are afraid to
some purpose. By G—, Grangousier conskites himself for fear, the poor drinker.
He is not skilled in warfare, nor hath he any stomach for it. He knows better
how to empty the flagons,—that is his art. I am of opinion that it is fit we
send back the carts and the money, and, for the rest, that very speedily we
fortify ourselves here, then prosecute our fortune. But what! Do they think to
have to do with a ninnywhoop, to feed you thus with cakes? You may see what it
is. The good usage and great familiarity which you have had with them
heretofore hath made you contemptible in their eyes. Anoint a villain, he will
prick you: prick a villain, and he will anoint you (Ungentem pungit, pungentem
rusticus ungit.).
