When they heard these words, some amongst them began to be afraid, and blessed
themselves with both hands, thinking indeed that he had been a devil disguised,
insomuch that one of them, named Good John, captain of the trained bands of the
country bumpkins, took his psalter out of his codpiece, and cried out aloud,
Hagios ho theos. If thou be of God, speak; if thou be of the other spirit,
avoid hence, and get thee going. Yet he went not away. Which words being heard
by all the soldiers that were there, divers of them being a little inwardly
terrified, departed from the place. All this did Gymnast very well remark and
consider, and therefore making as if he would have alighted from off his horse,
as he was poising himself on the mounting side, he most nimbly, with his short
sword by his thigh, shifting his foot in the stirrup, performed the
stirrup-leather feat, whereby, after the inclining of his body downwards, he
forthwith launched himself aloft in the air, and placed both his feet together
on the saddle, standing upright with his back turned towards the horse's head.
Now, said he, my case goes backward. Then suddenly in the same very posture
wherein he was, he fetched a gambol upon one foot, and, turning to the left
hand, failed not to carry his body perfectly round, just into its former
stance, without missing one jot. Ha, said Tripet, I will not do that at this
time, and not without cause. Well, said Gymnast, I have failed, I will undo
this leap. Then with a marvellous strength and agility, turning towards the
right hand, he fetched another frisking gambol as before, which done, he set
his right-hand thumb upon the hind-bow of the saddle, raised himself up, and
sprung in the air, poising and upholding his whole body upon the muscle and
nerve of the said thumb, and so turned and whirled himself about three times.
At the fourth, reversing his body, and overturning it upside down, and foreside
back, without touching anything, he brought himself betwixt the horse's two
ears, springing with all his body into the air, upon the thumb of his left
hand, and in that posture, turning like a windmill, did most actively do that
trick which is called the miller's pass. After this, clapping his right hand
flat upon the middle of the saddle, he gave himself such a jerking swing that
he thereby seated himself upon the crupper, after the manner of gentlewomen
sitting on horseback. This done, he easily passed his right leg over the
saddle, and placed himself like one that rides in croup. But, said he, it were
better for me to get into the saddle; then putting the thumbs of both hands
upon the crupper before him, and thereupon leaning himself, as upon the only
supporters of his body, he incontinently turned heels over head in the air, and
straight found himself betwixt the bow of the saddle in a good settlement. Then
with a somersault springing into the air again, he fell to stand with both his
feet close together upon the saddle, and there made above a hundred frisks,
turns, and demipommads, with his arms held out across, and in so doing cried
out aloud, I rage, I rage, devils, I am stark mad, devils, I am mad, hold me,
devils, hold me, hold, devils, hold, hold!  Whilst he was thus vaulting, the
rogues in great astonishment said to one another, By cock's death, he is a
goblin or a devil thus disguised. Ab hoste maligno libera nos, Domine, and ran
away in a full flight, as if they had been routed, looking now and then behind
them, like a dog that carrieth away a goose-wing in his mouth. Then Gymnast,
spying his advantage, alighted from his horse, drew his sword, and laid on
great blows upon the thickset and highest crested among them, and overthrew
them in great heaps, hurt, wounded, and bruised, being resisted by nobody, they
thinking he had been a starved devil, as well in regard of his wonderful feats
in vaulting, which they had seen, as for the talk Tripet had with him, calling
him poor devil. Only Tripet would have traitorously cleft his head with his
horseman's sword, or lance-knight falchion; but he was well armed, and felt
nothing of the blow but the weight of the stroke. Whereupon, turning suddenly
about, he gave Tripet a home-thrust, and upon the back of that, whilst he was
about to ward his head from a slash, he ran him in at the breast with a hit,
which at once cut his stomach, the fifth gut called the colon, and the half of
his liver, wherewith he fell to the ground, and in falling gushed forth above
four pottles of pottage, and his soul mingled with the pottage.  This done,
Gymnast withdrew himself, very wisely considering that a case of great
adventure and hazard should not be pursued unto its utmost period, and that it
becomes all cavaliers modestly to use their good fortune, without troubling or
stretching it too far. Wherefore, getting to horse, he gave him the spur,
taking the right way unto Vauguyon, and Prelinguand with him.
