As soon as he came, he related the estate and condition wherein they had found
the enemy, and the stratagem which he alone had used against all their
multitude, affirming that they were but rascally rogues, plunderers, thieves,
and robbers, ignorant of all military discipline, and that they might boldly
set forward unto the field; it being an easy matter to fell and strike them
down like beasts. Then Gargantua mounted his great mare, accompanied as we have
said before, and finding in his way a high and great tree, which commonly was
called by the name of St. Martin's tree, because heretofore St. Martin planted
a pilgrim's staff there, which in tract of time grew to that height and
greatness, said, This is that which I lacked; this tree shall serve me both for
a staff and lance. With that he pulled it up easily, plucked off the boughs,
and trimmed it at his pleasure. In the meantime his mare pissed to ease her
belly, but it was in such abundance that it did overflow the country seven
leagues, and all the piss of that urinal flood ran glib away towards the ford
of Vede, wherewith the water was so swollen that all the forces the enemy had
there were with great horror drowned, except some who had taken the way on the
left hand towards the hills. Gargantua, being come to the place of the wood of
Vede, was informed by Eudemon that there was some remainder of the enemy within
the castle, which to know, Gargantua cried out as loud as he was able, Are you
there, or are you not there? If you be there, be there no more; and if you are
not there, I have no more to say. But a ruffian gunner, whose charge was to
attend the portcullis over the gate, let fly a cannon-ball at him, and hit him
with that shot most furiously on the right temple of his head, yet did him no
more hurt than if he had but cast a prune or kernel of a wine-grape at him.
What is this? said Gargantua; do you throw at us grape-kernels here? The
vintage shall cost you dear; thinking indeed that the bullet had been the
kernel of a grape, or raisin-kernel.  Those who were within the castle, being
till then busy at the pillage, when they heard this noise ran to the towers and
fortresses, from whence they shot at him above nine thousand and
five-and-twenty falconshot and arquebusades, aiming all at his head, and so
thick did they shoot at him that he cried out, Ponocrates, my friend, these
flies here are like to put out mine eyes; give me a branch of those
willow-trees to drive them away, thinking that the bullets and stones shot out
of the great ordnance had been but dunflies. Ponocrates looked and saw that
there were no other flies but great shot which they had shot from the castle.
Then was it that he rushed with his great tree against the castle, and with
mighty blows overthrew both towers and fortresses, and laid all level with the
ground, by which means all that were within were slain and broken in pieces.
Going from thence, they came to the bridge at the mill, where they found all
the ford covered with dead bodies, so thick that they had choked up the mill
and stopped the current of its water, and these were those that were destroyed
in the urinal deluge of the mare. There they were at a stand, consulting how
they might pass without hindrance by these dead carcasses. But Gymnast said, If
the devils have passed there, I will pass well enough. The devils have passed
there, said Eudemon, to carry away the damned souls. By St. Treignan! said
Ponocrates, then by necessary consequence he shall pass there. Yes, yes, said
Gymnastes, or I shall stick in the way. Then setting spurs to his horse, he
passed through freely, his horse not fearing nor being anything affrighted at
the sight of the dead bodies; for he had accustomed him, according to the
doctrine of Aelian, not to fear armour, nor the carcasses of dead men; and that
not by killing men as Diomedes did the Thracians, or as Ulysses did in throwing
the corpses of his enemies at his horse's feet, as Homer saith, but by putting
a Jack-a-lent amongst his hay, and making him go over it ordinarily when he
gave him his oats. The other three followed him very close, except Eudemon
only, whose horse's fore-right or far forefoot sank up to the knee in the
paunch of a great fat chuff who lay there upon his back drowned, and could not
get it out. There was he pestered, until Gargantua, with the end of his staff,
thrust down the rest of the villain's tripes into the water whilst the horse
pulled out his foot; and, which is a wonderful thing in hippiatry, the said
horse was thoroughly cured of a ringbone which he had in that foot by this
touch of the burst guts of that great looby.
