Being come out of the river of Vede, they came very shortly after to
Grangousier's castle, who waited for them with great longing. At their coming
they were entertained with many congees, and cherished with embraces. Never was
seen a more joyful company, for Supplementum Supplementi Chronicorum saith that
Gargamelle died there with joy; for my part, truly I cannot tell, neither do I
care very much for her, nor for anybody else. The truth was, that Gargantua, in
shifting his clothes, and combing his head with a comb, which was nine hundred
foot long of the Jewish cane measure, and whereof the teeth were great tusks of
elephants, whole and entire, he made fall at every rake above seven balls of
bullets, at a dozen the ball, that stuck in his hair at the razing of the
castle of the wood of Vede. Which his father Grangousier seeing, thought they
had been lice, and said unto him, What, my dear son, hast thou brought us this
far some short-winged hawks of the college of Montague? I did not mean that
thou shouldst reside there. Then answered Ponocrates, My sovereign lord, think
not that I have placed him in that lousy college which they call Montague; I
had rather have put him amongst the grave-diggers of Sanct Innocent, so
enormous is the cruelty and villainy that I have known there: for the
galley-slaves are far better used amongst the Moors and Tartars, the murderers
in the criminal dungeons, yea, the very dogs in your house, than are the poor
wretched students in the aforesaid college. And if I were King of Paris, the
devil take me if I would not set it on fire, and burn both principal and
regents, for suffering this inhumanity to be exercised before their eyes. Then,
taking up one of these bullets, he said, These are cannon-shot, which your son
Gargantua hath lately received by the treachery of your enemies, as he was
passing before the wood of Vede.  But they have been so rewarded, that they are
all destroyed in the ruin of the castle, as were the Philistines by the policy
of Samson, and those whom the tower of Silohim slew, as it is written in the
thirteenth of Luke. My opinion is, that we pursue them whilst the luck is on
our side; for occasion hath all her hair on her forehead; when she is passed,
you may not recall her,â€”she hath no tuft whereby you can lay hold on her, for
she is bald in the hind-part of her head, and never returneth again. Truly,
said Grangousier, it shall not be at this time; for I will make you a feast
this night, and bid you welcome.  This said, they made ready supper, and, of
extraordinary besides his daily fare, were roasted sixteen oxen, three heifers,
two and thirty calves, three score and three fat kids, four score and fifteen
wethers, three hundred farrow pigs or sheats soused in sweet wine or must,
eleven score partridges, seven hundred snipes and woodcocks, four hundred
Loudun and Cornwall capons, six thousand pullets, and as many pigeons, six
hundred crammed hens, fourteen hundred leverets, or young hares and rabbits,
three hundred and three buzzards, and one thousand and seven hundred cockerels.
For venison, they could not so suddenly come by it, only eleven wild boars,
which the Abbot of Turpenay sent, and eighteen fallow deer which the Lord of
Gramount bestowed; together with seven score pheasants, which were sent by the
Lord of Essars; and some dozens of queests, coushats, ringdoves, and
woodculvers; river-fowl, teals and awteals, bitterns, courtes, plovers,
francolins, briganders, tyrasons, young lapwings, tame ducks, shovellers,
woodlanders, herons, moorhens, criels, storks, canepetiers, oranges, flamans,
which are phaenicopters, or crimson-winged sea-fowls, terrigoles, turkeys,
arbens, coots, solan-geese, curlews, termagants, and water-wagtails, with a
great deal of cream, curds, and fresh cheese, and store of soup, pottages, and
brewis with great variety. Without doubt there was meat enough, and it was
handsomely dressed by Snapsauce, Hotchpot, and Brayverjuice, Grangousier's
cooks. Jenkin Trudgeapace and Cleanglass were very careful to fill them drink.
