In this equipage they made an excursion upon the country till they came near to
the Vauguyon, which is the valley of Guyon, and to the spital, but could never
find anybody to speak unto; whereupon they returned a little back, and took
occasion to pass above the aforesaid hospital to try what intelligence they
could come by in those parts. In which resolution riding on, and by chance in a
pastoral lodge or shepherd's cottage near to Coudray hitting upon the five
pilgrims, they carried them way-bound and manacled, as if they had been spies,
for all the exclamations, adjurations, and requests that they could make. Being
come down from thence towards Seville, they were heard by Gargantua, who said
then unto those that were with him, Comrades and fellow-soldiers, we have here
met with an encounter, and they are ten times in number more than we. Shall we
charge them or no? What a devil, said the monk, shall we do else? Do you esteem
men by their number rather than by their valour and prowess? With this he cried
out, Charge, devils, charge! Which when the enemies heard, they thought
certainly that they had been very devils, and therefore even then began all of
them to run away as hard as they could drive, Drawforth only excepted, who
immediately settled his lance on its rest, and therewith hit the monk with all
his force on the very middle of his breast, but, coming against his horrific
frock, the point of the iron being with the blow either broke off or blunted,
it was in matter of execution as if you had struck against an anvil with a
little wax-candle.  Then did the monk with his staff of the cross give him such
a sturdy thump and whirret betwixt his neck and shoulders, upon the acromion
bone, that he made him lose both sense and motion and fall down stone dead at
his horse's feet; and, seeing the sign of the star which he wore scarfwise, he
said unto Gargantua, These men are but priests, which is but the beginning of a
monk; by St. John, I am a perfect monk, I will kill them to you like flies.
Then ran he after them at a swift and full gallop till he overtook the rear,
and felled them down like tree-leaves, striking athwart and alongst and every
way. Gymnast presently asked Gargantua if they should pursue them. To whom
Gargantua answered, By no means; for, according to right military discipline,
you must never drive your enemy unto despair, for that such a strait doth
multiply his force and increase his courage, which was before broken and cast
down; neither is there any better help or outrage of relief for men that are
amazed, out of heart, toiled, and spent, than to hope for no favour at all. How
many victories have been taken out of the hands of the victors by the
vanquished, when they would not rest satisfied with reason, but attempt to put
all to the sword, and totally to destroy their enemies, without leaving so much
as one to carry home news of the defeat of his fellows. Open, therefore, unto
your enemies all the gates and ways, and make to them a bridge of silver rather
than fail, that you may be rid of them. Yea, but, said Gymnast, they have the
monk. Have they the monk? said Gargantua. Upon mine honour, then, it will prove
to their cost. But to prevent all dangers, let us not yet retreat, but halt
here quietly as in an ambush; for I think I do already understand the policy
and judgment of our enemies. They are truly more directed by chance and mere
fortune than by good advice and counsel. In the meanwhile, whilst these made a
stop under the walnut-trees, the monk pursued on the chase, charging all he
overtook, and giving quarter to none, until he met with a trooper who carried
behind him one of the poor pilgrims, and there would have rifled him. The
pilgrim, in hope of relief at the sight of the monk, cried out, Ha, my lord
prior, my good friend, my lord prior, save me, I beseech you, save me! Which
words being heard by those that rode in the van, they instantly faced about,
and seeing there was nobody but the monk that made this great havoc and
slaughter among them, they loaded him with blows as thick as they use to do an
ass with wood. But of all this he felt nothing, especially when they struck
upon his frock, his skin was so hard. Then they committed him to two of the
marshal's men to keep, and, looking about, saw nobody coming against them,
whereupon they thought that Gargantua and his party were fled. Then was it that
they rode as hard as they could towards the walnut-trees to meet with them, and
left the monk there all alone, with his two foresaid men to guard him.
Gargantua heard the noise and neighing of the horses, and said to his men,
Comrades, I hear the track and beating of the enemy's horse-feet, and withal
perceive that some of them come in a troop and full body against us. Let us
rally and close here, then set forward in order, and by this means we shall be
able to receive their charge to their loss and our honour.
