The monk, seeing them break off thus without order, conjectured that they were
to set upon Gargantua and those that were with him, and was wonderfully grieved
that he could not succour them. Then considered he the countenance of the two
keepers in whose custody he was, who would have willingly run after the troops
to get some booty and plunder, and were always looking towards the valley unto
which they were going. Farther, he syllogized, saying, These men are but badly
skilled in matters of war, for they have not required my parole, neither have
they taken my sword from me. Suddenly hereafter he drew his brackmard or
horseman's sword, wherewith he gave the keeper which held him on the right side
such a sound slash that he cut clean through the jugulary veins and the
sphagitid or transparent arteries of the neck, with the fore-part of the throat
called the gargareon, even unto the two adenes, which are throat kernels; and,
redoubling the blow, he opened the spinal marrow betwixt the second and third
vertebrae. There fell down that keeper stark dead to the ground. Then the monk,
reining his horse to the left, ran upon the other, who, seeing his fellow dead,
and the monk to have the advantage of him, cried with a loud voice, Ha, my lord
prior, quarter; I yield, my lord prior, quarter; quarter, my good friend, my
lord prior. And the monk cried likewise, My lord posterior, my friend, my lord
posterior, you shall have it upon your posteriorums. Ha, said the keeper, my
lord prior, my minion, my gentle lord prior, I pray God make you an abbot. By
the habit, said the monk, which I wear, I will here make you a cardinal. What!
do you use to pay ransoms to religious men? You shall therefore have by-and-by
a red hat of my giving. And the fellow cried, Ha, my lord prior, my lord prior,
my lord abbot that shall be, my lord cardinal, my lord all! Ha, ha, hes, no, my
lord prior, my good little lord the prior, I yield, render and deliver myself
up to you. And I deliver thee, said the monk, to all the devils in hell. Then
at one stroke he cut off his head, cutting his scalp upon the temple-bones, and
lifting up in the upper part of the skull the two triangulary bones called
sincipital, or the two bones bregmatis, together with the sagittal commissure
or dartlike seam which distinguisheth the right side of the head from the left,
as also a great part of the coronal or forehead bone, by which terrible blow
likewise he cut the two meninges or films which enwrap the brain, and made a
deep wound in the brain's two posterior ventricles, and the cranium or skull
abode hanging upon his shoulders by the skin of the pericranium behind, in form
of a doctor's bonnet, black without and red within. Thus fell he down also to
the ground stark dead.  And presently the monk gave his horse the spur, and
kept the way that the enemy held, who had met with Gargantua and his companions
in the broad highway, and were so diminished of their number for the enormous
slaughter that Gargantua had made with his great tree amongst them, as also
Gymnast, Ponocrates, Eudemon, and the rest, that they began to retreat
disorderly and in great haste, as men altogether affrighted and troubled in
both sense and understanding, and as if they had seen the very proper species
and form of death before their eyes; or rather, as when you see an ass with a
brizze or gadbee under his tail, or fly that stings him, run hither and thither
without keeping any path or way, throwing down his load to the ground, breaking
his bridle and reins, and taking no breath nor rest, and no man can tell what
ails him, for they see not anything touch him. So fled these people destitute
of wit, without knowing any cause of flying, only pursued by a panic terror
which in their minds they had conceived. The monk, perceiving that their whole
intent was to betake themselves to their heels, alighted from his horse and got
upon a big large rock which was in the way, and with his great brackmard sword
laid such load upon those runaways, and with main strength fetching a compass
with his arm without feigning or sparing, slew and overthrew so many that his
sword broke in two pieces. Then thought he within himself that he had slain and
killed sufficiently, and that the rest should escape to carry news. Therefore
he took up a battle-axe of those that lay there dead, and got upon the rock
again, passing his time to see the enemy thus flying and to tumble himself
amongst the dead bodies, only that he suffered none to carry pike, sword,
lance, nor gun with him, and those who carried the pilgrims bound he made to
alight, and gave their horses unto the said pilgrims, keeping them there with
him under the hedge, and also Touchfaucet, who was then his prisoner.
