Touchfaucet was presented unto Grangousier, and by him examined upon the
enterprise and attempt of Picrochole, what it was he could pretend to, or aim
at, by the rustling stir and tumultuary coil of this his sudden invasion.
Whereunto he answered, that his end and purpose was to conquer all the country,
if he could, for the injury done to his cake-bakers. It is too great an
undertaking, said Grangousier; and, as the proverb is, He that grips too much,
holds fast but little. The time is not now as formerly, to conquer the kingdoms
of our neighbour princes, and to build up our own greatness upon the loss of
our nearest Christian Brother. This imitation of the ancient Herculeses,
Alexanders, Hannibals, Scipios, Caesars, and other such heroes, is quite
contrary to the profession of the gospel of Christ, by which we are commanded
to preserve, keep, rule, and govern every man his own country and lands, and
not in a hostile manner to invade others; and that which heretofore the Barbars
and Saracens called prowess and valour, we do now call robbing, thievery, and
wickedness. It would have been more commendable in him to have contained
himself within the bounds of his own territories, royally governing them, than
to insult and domineer in mine, pillaging and plundering everywhere like a most
unmerciful enemy; for, by ruling his own with discretion, he might have
increased his greatness, but by robbing me he cannot escape destruction. Go
your ways in the name of God, prosecute good enterprises, show your king what
is amiss, and never counsel him with regard unto your own particular profit,
for the public loss will swallow up the private benefit. As for your ransom, I
do freely remit it to you, and will that your arms and horse be restored to
you; so should good neighbours do, and ancient friends, seeing this our
difference is not properly war. As Plato, Lib. 5 de Repub., would not have it
called war, but sedition, when the Greeks took up arms against one another, and
that therefore, when such combustions should arise amongst them, his advice was
to behave themselves in the managing of them with all discretion and modesty.
Although you call it war, it is but superficial; it entereth not into the
closet and inmost cabinet of our hearts. For neither of us hath been wronged in
his honour, nor is there any question betwixt us in the main, but only how to
redress, by the bye, some petty faults committed by our men,â€”I mean, both yours
and ours, which, although you knew, you ought to let pass; for these
quarrelsome persons deserve rather to be contemned than mentioned, especially
seeing I offered them satisfaction according to the wrong. God shall be the
just judge of our variances, whom I beseech by death rather to take me out of
this life, and to permit my goods to perish and be destroyed before mine eyes,
than that by me or mine he should in any sort be wronged. These words uttered,
he called the monk, and before them all thus spoke unto him, Friar John, my
good friend, it is you that took prisoner the Captain Touchfaucet here present?
Sir, said the monk, seeing himself is here, and that he is of the years of
discretion, I had rather you should know it by his confession than by any words
of mine. Then said Touchfaucet, My sovereign lord it is he indeed that took me,
and I do therefore most freely yield myself his prisoner. Have you put him to
any ransom? said Grangousier to the monk. No, said the monk, of that I take no
care. How much would you have for having taken him? Nothing, nothing, said the
monk; I am not swayed by that, nor do I regard it. Then Grangousier commanded
that, in presence of Touchfaucet, should be delivered to the monk for taking
him the sum of three score and two thousand saluts (in English money, fifteen
thousand and five hundred pounds), which was done, whilst they made a collation
or little banquet to the said Touchfaucet, of whom Grangousier asked if he
would stay with him, or if he loved rather to return to his king. Touchfaucet
answered that he was content to take whatever course he would advise him to.
Then, said Grangousier, return unto your king, and God be with you.  Then he
gave him an excellent sword of a Vienne blade, with a golden scabbard wrought
with vine-branch-like flourishes, of fair goldsmith's work, and a collar or
neck-chain of gold, weighing seven hundred and two thousand marks (at eight
ounces each), garnished with precious stones of the finest sort, esteemed at a
hundred and sixty thousand ducats, and ten thousand crowns more, as an
honourable donative, by way of present.  After this talk Touchfaucet got to his
horse, and Gargantua for his safety allowed him the guard of thirty men-at-arms
and six score archers to attend him, under the conduct of Gymnast, to bring him
even unto the gate of the rock Clermond, if there were need. As soon as he was
gone, the monk restored unto Grangousier the three score and two thousand
saluts which he had received, saying, Sir, it is not as yet the time for you to
give such gifts; stay till this war be at an end, for none can tell what
accidents may occur, and war begun without good provision of money beforehand
for going through with it, is but as a breathing of strength, and blast that
will quickly pass away. Coin is the sinews of war. Well then, said Grangousier,
at the end I will content you by some honest recompense, as also all those who
shall do me good service.
