When it was a question of charity, he was not to be rebuffed even by a refusal,
and on such occasions he gave utterance to remarks which induced reflection.
Once he was begging for the poor in a drawing-room of the town; there was
present the Marquis de Champtercier, a wealthy and avaricious old man, who
contrived to be, at one and the same time, an ultra-royalist and an
ultra-Voltairian. This variety of man has actually existed. When the Bishop
came to him, he touched his arm, "You must give me something, M. le Marquis."
The Marquis turned round and answered dryly, "I have poor people of my own,
Monseigneur." "Give them to me," replied the Bishop.  One day he preached the
following sermon in the cathedral:â€” "My very dear brethren, my good friends,
there are thirteen hundred and twenty thousand peasants' dwellings in France
which have but three openings; eighteen hundred and seventeen thousand hovels
which have but two openings, the door and one window; and three hundred and
forty-six thousand cabins besides which have but one opening, the door. And
this arises from a thing which is called the tax on doors and windows. Just put
poor families, old women and little children, in those buildings, and behold
the fevers and maladies which result! Alas! God gives air to men; the law sells
it to them. I do not blame the law, but I bless God. In the department of the
Isere, in the Var, in the two departments of the Alpes, the Hautes, and the
Basses, the peasants have not even wheelbarrows; they transport their manure on
the backs of men; they have no candles, and they burn resinous sticks, and bits
of rope dipped in pitch. That is the state of affairs throughout the whole of
the hilly country of Dauphine. They make bread for six months at one time; they
bake it with dried cow-dung. In the winter they break this bread up with an
axe, and they soak it for twenty-four hours, in order to render it eatable. My
brethren, have pity! behold the suffering on all sides of you!" Born a
Provencal, he easily familiarized himself with the dialect of the south. He
said, "En be! moussu, ses sage?" as in lower Languedoc; "Onte anaras passa?" as
in the Basses-Alpes; "Puerte un bouen moutu embe un bouen fromage grase," as in
upper Dauphine. This pleased the people extremely, and contributed not a little
to win him access to all spirits. He was perfectly at home in the thatched
cottage and in the mountains. He understood how to say the grandest things in
the most vulgar of idioms. As he spoke all tongues, he entered into all hearts.
Moreover, he was the same towards people of the world and towards the lower
classes. He condemned nothing in haste and without taking circumstances into
account. He said, "Examine the road over which the fault has passed."
