About this same time those of Besse, of the Old Market, of St. James' Bourg, of
the Draggage, of Parille, of the Rivers, of the rocks St. Pol, of the
Vaubreton, of Pautille, of the Brehemont, of Clainbridge, of Cravant, of
Grammont, of the town at the Badgerholes, of Huymes, of Segre, of Husse, of St.
Lovant, of Panzoust, of the Coldraux, of Verron, of Coulaines, of Chose, of
Varenes, of Bourgueil, of the Bouchard Island, of the Croullay, of Narsay, of
Cande, of Montsoreau, and other bordering places, sent ambassadors unto
Grangousier, to tell him that they were advised of the great wrongs which
Picrochole had done him, and, in regard of their ancient confederacy, offered
him what assistance they could afford, both in men, money, victuals, and
ammunition, and other necessaries for war. The money which by the joint
agreement of them all was sent unto him, amounted to six score and fourteen
millions, two crowns and a half of pure gold. The forces wherewith they did
assist him did consist in fifteen thousand cuirassiers, two-and-thirty thousand
light horsemen, four score and nine thousand dragoons, and a hundred-and-forty
thousand volunteer adventurers. These had with them eleven thousand and two
hundred cannons, double cannons, long pieces of artillery called basilisks, and
smaller sized ones known by the name of spirols, besides the mortar-pieces and
grenadoes. Of pioneers they had seven-and-forty thousand, all victualled and
paid for six months and four days of advance. Which offer Gargantua did not
altogether refuse, nor wholly accept of; but, giving them hearty thanks, said
that he would compose and order the war by such a device, that there should not
be found great need to put so many honest men to trouble in the managing of it;
and therefore was content at that time to give order only for bringing along
the legions which he maintained in his ordinary garrison towns of the
Deviniere, of Chavigny, of Gravot, and of the Quinquenais, amounting to the
number of two thousand cuirassiers, three score and six thousand foot-soldiers,
six-and-twenty thousand dragoons, attended by two hundred pieces of great
ordnance, two-and-twenty thousand pioneers, and six thousand light horsemen,
all drawn up in troops, so well befitted and accommodated with their
commissaries, sutlers, farriers, harness-makers, and other such like necessary
members in a military camp, so fully instructed in the art of warfare, so
perfectly knowing and following their colours, so ready to hear and obey their
captains, so nimble to run, so strong at their charging, so prudent in their
adventures, and every day so well disciplined, that they seemed rather to be a
concert of organ-pipes, or mutual concord of the wheels of a clock, than an
infantry and cavalry, or army of soldiers.  Touchfaucet immediately after his
return presented himself before Picrochole, and related unto him at large all
that he had done and seen, and at last endeavoured to persuade him with strong
and forcible arguments to capitulate and make an agreement with Grangousier,
whom he found to be the honestest man in the world; saying further, that it was
neither right nor reason thus to trouble his neighbours, of whom they had never
received anything but good. And in regard of the main point, that they should
never be able to go through stitch with that war, but to their great damage and
mischief; for the forces of Picrochole were not so considerable but that
Grangousier could easily overthrow them.  He had not well done speaking when
Rashcalf said out aloud, Unhappy is that prince which is by such men served,
who are so easily corrupted, as I know Touchfaucet is. For I see his courage so
changed that he had willingly joined with our enemies to fight against us and
betray us, if they would have received him; but as virtue is of all, both
friends and foes, praised and esteemed, so is wickedness soon known and
suspected, and although it happen the enemies to make use thereof for their
profit, yet have they always the wicked and the traitors in abomination.
