Gargantua had the charge of the whole army, and his father Grangousier stayed
in his castle, who, encouraging them with good words, promised great rewards
unto those that should do any notable service. Having thus set forward, as soon
as they had gained the pass at the ford of Vede, with boats and bridges
speedily made they passed over in a trice. Then considering the situation of
the town, which was on a high and advantageous place, Gargantua thought fit to
call his council, and pass that night in deliberation upon what was to be done.
But Gymnast said unto him, My sovereign lord, such is the nature and complexion
of the French, that they are worth nothing but at the first push. Then are they
more fierce than devils. But if they linger a little and be wearied with
delays, they'll prove more faint and remiss than women. My opinion is,
therefore, that now presently, after your men have taken breath and some small
refection, you give order for a resolute assault, and that we storm them
instantly. His advice was found very good, and for effectuating thereof he
brought forth his army into the plain field, and placed the reserves on the
skirt or rising of a little hill. The monk took along with him six companies of
foot and two hundred horsemen well armed, and with great diligence crossed the
marsh, and valiantly got upon the top of the green hillock even unto the
highway which leads to Loudun. Whilst the assault was thus begun, Picrochole's
men could not tell well what was best, to issue out and receive the assailants,
or keep within the town and not to stir. Himself in the mean time, without
deliberation, sallied forth in a rage with the cavalry of his guard, who were
forthwith received and royally entertained with great cannon-shot that fell
upon them like hail from the high grounds on which the artillery was planted.
Whereupon the Gargantuists betook themselves unto the valleys, to give the
ordnance leave to play and range with the larger scope.  Those of the town
defended themselves as well as they could, but their shot passed over us
without doing us any hurt at all. Some of Picrochole's men that had escaped our
artillery set most fiercely upon our soldiers, but prevailed little; for they
were all let in betwixt the files, and there knocked down to the ground, which
their fellow-soldiers seeing, they would have retreated, but the monk having
seized upon the pass by the which they were to return, they ran away and fled
in all the disorder and confusion that could be imagined.  Some would have
pursued after them and followed the chase, but the monk withheld them,
apprehending that in their pursuit the pursuers might lose their ranks, and so
give occasion to the besieged to sally out of the town upon them. Then staying
there some space and none coming against him, he sent the Duke Phrontist to
advise Gargantua to advance towards the hill upon the left hand, to hinder
Picrochole's retreat at that gate; which Gargantua did with all expedition, and
sent thither four brigades under the conduct of Sebast, which had no sooner
reached the top of the hill, but they met Picrochole in the teeth, and those
that were with him scattered.  Then charged they upon them stoutly, yet were
they much endamaged by those that were upon the walls, who galled them with all
manner of shot, both from the great ordnance, small guns, and bows. Which
Gargantua perceiving, he went with a strong party to their relief, and with his
artillery began to thunder so terribly upon that canton of the wall, and so
long, that all the strength within the town, to maintain and fill up the
breach, was drawn thither. The monk seeing that quarter which he kept besieged
void of men and competent guards, and in a manner altogether naked and
abandoned, did most magnanimously on a sudden lead up his men towards the fort,
and never left it till he had got up upon it, knowing that such as come to the
reserve in a conflict bring with them always more fear and terror than those
that deal about them with they hands in the fight.  Nevertheless, he gave no
alarm till all his soldiers had got within the wall, except the two hundred
horsemen, whom he left without to secure his entry. Then did he give a most
horrible shout, so did all these who were with him, and immediately thereafter,
without resistance, putting to the edge of the sword the guard that was at that
gate, they opened it to the horsemen, with whom most furiously they altogether
ran towards the east gate, where all the hurlyburly was, and coming close upon
them in the rear overthrew all their forces.
