Being safely arrived, he came to my said father, and would have kissed his
feet. That action was found too submissively low, and therefore was not
permitted, but in exchange he was most cordially embraced. He offered his
presents; they were not received, because they were too excessive: he yielded
himself voluntarily a servant and vassal, and was content his whole posterity
should be liable to the same bondage; this was not accepted of, because it
seemed not equitable: he surrendered, by virtue of the decree of his great
parliamentary council, his whole countries and kingdoms to him, offering the
deed and conveyance, signed, sealed, and ratified by all those that were
concerned in it; this was altogether refused, and the parchments cast into the
fire. In end, this free goodwill and simple meaning of the Canarians wrought
such tenderness in my father's heart that he could not abstain from shedding
tears, and wept most profusely; then, by choice words very congruously adapted,
strove in what he could to diminish the estimation of the good offices which he
had done them, saying, that any courtesy he had conferred upon them was not
worth a rush, and what favour soever he had showed them he was bound to do it.
But so much the more did Alpharbal augment the repute thereof. What was the
issue? Whereas for his ransom, in the greatest extremity of rigour and most
tyrannical dealing, could not have been exacted above twenty times a hundred
thousand crowns, and his eldest sons detained as hostages till that sum had
been paid, they made themselves perpetual tributaries, and obliged to give us
every year two millions of gold at four-and-twenty carats fine. The first year
we received the whole sum of two millions; the second year of their own accord
they paid freely to us three-and-twenty hundred thousand crowns; the third
year, six-and-twenty hundred thousand; the fourth year, three millions, and do
so increase it always out of their own goodwill that we shall be constrained to
forbid them to bring us any more. This is the nature of gratitude and true
thankfulness. For time, which gnaws and diminisheth all things else, augments
and increaseth benefits; because a noble action of liberality, done to a man of
reason, doth grow continually by his generous thinking of it and remembering
it.  Being unwilling therefore any way to degenerate from the hereditary
mildness and clemency of my parents, I do now forgive you, deliver you from all
fines and imprisonments, fully release you, set you at liberty, and every way
make you as frank and free as ever you were before. Moreover, at your going out
of the gate, you shall have every one of you three months' pay to bring you
home into your houses and families, and shall have a safe convoy of six hundred
cuirassiers and eight thousand foot under the conduct of Alexander, esquire of
my body, that the clubmen of the country may not do you any injury. God be with
you! I am sorry from my heart that Picrochole is not here; for I would have
given him to understand that this war was undertaken against my will and
without any hope to increase either my goods or renown. But seeing he is lost,
and that no man can tell where nor how he went away, it is my will that his
kingdom remain entire to his son; who, because he is too young, he not being
yet full five years old, shall be brought up and instructed by the ancient
princes and learned men of the kingdom. And because a realm thus desolate may
easily come to ruin, if the covetousness and avarice of those who by their
places are obliged to administer justice in it be not curbed and restrained, I
ordain and will have it so, that Ponocrates be overseer and superintendent
above all his governors, with whatever power and authority is requisite
thereto, and that he be continually with the child until he find him able and
capable to rule and govern by himself.  Now I must tell you, that you are to
understand how a too feeble and dissolute facility in pardoning evildoers
giveth them occasion to commit wickedness afterwards more readily, upon this
pernicious confidence of receiving favour. I consider that Moses, the meekest
man that was in his time upon the earth, did severely punish the mutinous and
seditious people of Israel. I consider likewise that Julius Caesar, who was so
gracious an emperor that Cicero said of him that his fortune had nothing more
excellent than that he could, and his virtue nothing better than that he would
always save and pardon every manâ€”he, notwithstanding all this, did in certain
places most rigorously punish the authors of rebellion. After the example of
these good men, it is my will and pleasure that you deliver over unto me before
you depart hence, first, that fine fellow Marquet, who was the prime cause,
origin, and groundwork of this war by his vain presumption and overweening;
secondly, his fellow cake-bakers, who were neglective in checking and
reprehending his idle hairbrained humour in the instant time; and lastly, all
the councillors, captains, officers, and domestics of Picrochole, who had been
incendiaries or fomenters of the war by provoking, praising, or counselling him
to come out of his limits thus to trouble us.
