There was left only the monk to provide for, whom Gargantua would have made
Abbot of Seville, but he refused it. He would have given him the Abbey of
Bourgueil, or of Sanct Florent, which was better, or both, if it pleased him;
but the monk gave him a very peremptory answer, that he would never take upon
him the charge nor government of monks. For how shall I be able, said he, to
rule over others, that have not full power and command of myself? If you think
I have done you, or may hereafter do any acceptable service, give me leave to
found an abbey after my own mind and fancy. The motion pleased Gargantua very
well, who thereupon offered him all the country of Theleme by the river of
Loire till within two leagues of the great forest of Port-Huaulx. The monk then
requested Gargantua to institute his religious order contrary to all others.
First, then, said Gargantua, you must not build a wall about your convent, for
all other abbeys are strongly walled and mured about. See, said the monk, and
not without cause (seeing wall and mur signify but one and the same thing);
where there is mur before and mur behind, there is store of murmur, envy, and
mutual conspiracy. Moreover, seeing there are certain convents in the world
whereof the custom is, if any woman come in, I mean chaste and honest women,
they immediately sweep the ground which they have trod upon; therefore was it
ordained, that if any man or woman entered into religious orders should by
chance come within this new abbey, all the rooms should be thoroughly washed
and cleansed through which they had passed. And because in all other
monasteries and nunneries all is compassed, limited, and regulated by hours, it
was decreed that in this new structure there should be neither clock nor dial,
but that according to the opportunities and incident occasions all their hours
should be disposed of; for, said Gargantua, the greatest loss of time that I
know is to count the hours. What good comes of it? Nor can there be any greater
dotage in the world than for one to guide and direct his courses by the sound
of a bell, and not by his own judgment and discretion.  Item, Because at that
time they put no women into nunneries but such as were either purblind,
blinkards, lame, crooked, ill-favoured, misshapen, fools, senseless, spoiled,
or corrupt; nor encloistered any men but those that were either sickly, subject
to defluxions, ill-bred louts, simple sots, or peevish trouble-houses. But to
the purpose, said the monk. A woman that is neither fair nor good, to what use
serves she? To make a nun of, said Gargantua. Yea, said the monk, and to make
shirts and smocks. Therefore was it ordained that into this religious order
should be admitted no women that were not fair, well-featured, and of a sweet
disposition; nor men that were not comely, personable, and well conditioned.
Item, Because in the convents of women men come not but underhand, privily, and
by stealth, it was therefore enacted that in this house there shall be no women
in case there be not men, nor men in case there be not women.  Item, Because
both men and women that are received into religious orders after the expiring
of their noviciate or probation year were constrained and forced perpetually to
stay there all the days of their life, it was therefore ordered that all
whatever, men or women, admitted within this abbey, should have full leave to
depart with peace and contentment whensoever it should seem good to them so to
do.  Item, for that the religious men and women did ordinarily make three vows,
to wit, those of chastity, poverty, and obedience, it was therefore constituted
and appointed that in this convent they might be honourably married, that they
might be rich, and live at liberty. In regard of the legitimate time of the
persons to be initiated, and years under and above which they were not capable
of reception, the women were to be admitted from ten till fifteen, and the men
from twelve till eighteen.
