For the fabric and furniture of the abbey Gargantua caused to be delivered out
in ready money seven-and-twenty hundred thousand, eight hundred and
one-and-thirty of those golden rams of Berry which have a sheep stamped on the
one side and a flowered cross on the other; and for every year, until the whole
work were completed, he allotted threescore nine thousand crowns of the sun,
and as many of the seven stars, to be charged all upon the receipt of the
custom. For the foundation and maintenance thereof for ever, he settled a
perpetual fee-farm-rent of three-and-twenty hundred, three score and nine
thousand, five hundred and fourteen rose nobles, exempted from all homage,
fealty, service, or burden whatsoever, and payable every year at the gate of
the abbey; and of this by letters patent passed a very good grant. The
architecture was in a figure hexagonal, and in such a fashion that in every one
of the six corners there was built a great round tower of threescore foot in
diameter, and were all of a like form and bigness. Upon the north side ran
along the river of Loire, on the bank whereof was situated the tower called
Arctic. Going towards the east, there was another called Calaer,—the next
following Anatole,—the next Mesembrine,—the next Hesperia, and the last Criere.
Every tower was distant from other the space of three hundred and twelve paces.
The whole edifice was everywhere six storeys high, reckoning the cellars
underground for one. The second was arched after the fashion of a
basket-handle; the rest were ceiled with pure wainscot, flourished with
Flanders fretwork, in the form of the foot of a lamp, and covered above with
fine slates, with an endorsement of lead, carrying the antique figures of
little puppets and animals of all sorts, notably well suited to one another,
and gilt, together with the gutters, which, jutting without the walls from
betwixt the crossbars in a diagonal figure, painted with gold and azure,
reached to the very ground, where they ended into great conduit-pipes, which
carried all away unto the river from under the house.  This same building was a
hundred times more sumptuous and magnificent than ever was Bonnivet, Chambourg,
or Chantilly; for there were in it nine thousand, three hundred and
two-and-thirty chambers, every one whereof had a withdrawing-room, a handsome
closet, a wardrobe, an oratory, and neat passage, leading into a great and
spacious hall. Between every tower in the midst of the said body of building
there was a pair of winding, such as we now call lantern stairs, whereof the
steps were part of porphyry, which is a dark red marble spotted with white,
part of Numidian stone, which is a kind of yellowishly-streaked marble upon
various colours, and part of serpentine marble, with light spots on a dark
green ground, each of those steps being two-and-twenty foot in length and three
fingers thick, and the just number of twelve betwixt every rest, or, as we now
term it, landing-place. In every resting-place were two fair antique arches
where the light came in: and by those they went into a cabinet, made even with
and of the breadth of the said winding, and the reascending above the roofs of
the house ended conically in a pavilion. By that vise or winding they entered
on every side into a great hall, and from the halls into the chambers. From the
Arctic tower unto the Criere were the fair great libraries in Greek, Latin,
Hebrew, French, Italian, and Spanish, respectively distributed in their several
cantons, according to the diversity of these languages. In the midst there was
a wonderful scalier or winding-stair, the entry whereof was without the house,
in a vault or arch six fathom broad. It was made in such symmetry and largeness
that six men-at-arms with their lances in their rests might together in a
breast ride all up to the very top of all the palace. From the tower Anatole to
the Mesembrine were fair spacious galleries, all coloured over and painted with
the ancient prowesses, histories, and descriptions of the world. In the midst
thereof there was likewise such another ascent and gate as we said there was on
the river-side. Upon that gate was written in great antique letters that which
followeth.
