Next to their smock they put on the pretty kirtle or vasquin of pure silk
camlet: above that went the taffety or tabby farthingale, of white, red, tawny,
grey, or of any other colour. Above this taffety petticoat they had another of
cloth of tissue or brocade, embroidered with fine gold and interlaced with
needlework, or as they thought good, and according to the temperature and
disposition of the weather had their upper coats of satin, damask, or velvet,
and those either orange, tawny, green, ash-coloured, blue, yellow, bright red,
crimson, or white, and so forth; or had them of cloth of gold, cloth of silver,
or some other choice stuff, enriched with purl, or embroidered according to the
dignity of the festival days and times wherein they wore them.  Their gowns,
being still correspondent to the season, were either of cloth of gold frizzled
with a silver-raised work; of red satin, covered with gold purl; of tabby, or
taffety, white, blue, black, tawny, &c., of silk serge, silk camlet, velvet,
cloth of silver, silver tissue, cloth of gold, gold wire, figured velvet, or
figured satin tinselled and overcast with golden threads, in divers variously
purfled draughts.  In the summer some days instead of gowns they wore light
handsome mantles, made either of the stuff of the aforesaid attire, or like
Moresco rugs, of violet velvet frizzled, with a raised work of gold upon silver
purl, or with a knotted cord-work of gold embroidery, everywhere garnished with
little Indian pearls. They always carried a fair panache, or plume of feathers,
of the colour of their muff, bravely adorned and tricked out with glistering
spangles of gold. In the winter time they had their taffety gowns of all
colours, as above-named, and those lined with the rich furrings of hind-wolves,
or speckled lynxes, black-spotted weasels, martlet skins of Calabria, sables,
and other costly furs of an inestimable value. Their beads, rings, bracelets,
collars, carcanets, and neck-chains were all of precious stones, such as
carbuncles, rubies, baleus, diamonds, sapphires, emeralds, turquoises, garnets,
agates, beryls, and excellent margarites. Their head-dressing also varied with
the season of the year, according to which they decked themselves. In winter it
was of the French fashion; in the spring, of the Spanish; in summer, of the
fashion of Tuscany, except only upon the holy days and Sundays, at which times
they were accoutred in the French mode, because they accounted it more
honourable and better befitting the garb of a matronal pudicity.  The men were
apparelled after their fashion. Their stockings were of tamine or of cloth
serge, of white, black, scarlet, or some other ingrained colour. Their breeches
were of velvet, of the same colour with their stockings, or very near,
embroidered and cut according to their fancy. Their doublet was of cloth of
gold, of cloth of silver, of velvet, satin, damask, taffeties, &c., of the same
colours, cut, embroidered, and suitably trimmed up in perfection. The points
were of silk of the same colours; the tags were of gold well enamelled. Their
coats and jerkins were of cloth of gold, cloth of silver, gold, tissue or
velvet embroidered, as they thought fit. Their gowns were every whit as costly
as those of the ladies. Their girdles were of silks, of the colour of their
doublets. Every one had a gallant sword by his side, the hilt and handle
whereof were gilt, and the scabbard of velvet, of the colour of his breeches,
with a chape of gold, and pure goldsmith's work. The dagger was of the same.
Their caps or bonnets were of black velvet, adorned with jewels and buttons of
gold. Upon that they wore a white plume, most prettily and minion-like parted
by so many rows of gold spangles, at the end whereof hung dangling in a more
sparkling resplendency fair rubies, emeralds, diamonds, &c., but there was such
a sympathy betwixt the gallants and the ladies, that every day they were
apparelled in the same livery. And that they might not miss, there were certain
gentlemen appointed to tell the youths every morning what vestments the ladies
would on that day wear: for all was done according to the pleasure of the
ladies. In these so handsome clothes, and habiliments so rich, think not that
either one or other of either sex did waste any time at all; for the masters of
the wardrobes had all their raiments and apparel so ready for every morning,
and the chamber-ladies so well skilled, that in a trice they would be dressed
and completely in their clothes from head to foot. And to have those
accoutrements with the more conveniency, there was about the wood of Theleme a
row of houses of the extent of half a league, very neat and cleanly, wherein
dwelt the goldsmiths, lapidaries, jewellers, embroiderers, tailors,
gold-drawers, velvet-weavers, tapestry-makers and upholsterers, who wrought
there every one in his own trade, and all for the aforesaid jolly friars and
nuns of the new stamp. They were furnished with matter and stuff from the hands
of the Lord Nausiclete, who every year brought them seven ships from the Perlas
and Cannibal Islands, laden with ingots of gold, with raw silk, with pearls and
precious stones. And if any margarites, called unions, began to grow old and
lose somewhat of their natural whiteness and lustre, those with their art they
did renew by tendering them to eat to some pretty cocks, as they use to give
casting unto hawks.
