The two councils were not disposed to be behind the Directory in the
manifestation of joy. A few days after they gave a banquet to the General in
the gallery of the Louvre, which had recently been enriched by the masterpieces
of painting conquered in Italy.  At this time Bonaparte displayed great modesty
in all his transactions in Paris. The administrators of the department of the
Seine having sent a deputation to him to inquire what hour and day he would
allow them to wait on him, he carried himself his answer to the department,
accompanied by General Berthier. It was also remarked that the judge of the
peace of the arrondissement where the General lived having called on him on the
6th of December, the evening of his arrival, he returned the visit next
morning. These attentions, trifling as they may appear, were not without their
effect on the minds of the Parisians.  In consequence of General Bonaparte's
victories, the peace he had effected, and the brilliant reception of which he
had been the object, the business of Vendemiaire was in some measure forgotten.
Every one was eager to get a sight of the young hero whose career had commenced
with so much 'eclat'. He lived very retiredly, yet went often to the theatre.
He desired me, one day, to go and request the representation of two of the best
pieces of the time, in which Elleviou, Mesdames St. Aubin, Phillis, and other
distinguished performers played. His message was, that he only wished these two
pieces on the same night, if that were possible. The manager told me that
nothing that the conqueror of Italy wished for was impossible, for he had long
ago erased that word from the dictionary. Bonaparte laughed heartily at the
manager's answer. When we went to the theatre he seated himself, as usual, in
the back of the box, behind Madame Bonaparte, making me sit by her side. The
pit and boxes, however, soon found out that he was in the house, and loudly
called for him. Several times an earnest desire to see him was manifested, but
all in vain, for he never showed himself.  Some days after, being at the
Theatre des Arts, at the second representation of 'Horatius Cocles', although
he was sitting at the back of a box in the second tier, the audience discovered
that he was in the house. Immediately acclamations arose from all quarters; but
he kept himself concealed as much as possible, and said to a person in the next
box, "Had I known that the boxes were so exposed, I should not have come."
During Bonaparte's stay at Paris a woman sent a messenger to warn him that his
life would be attempted, and that poison was to be employed for that purpose.
Bonaparte had the bearer of this information arrested, who went, accompanied by
the judge of the peace, to the woman's house, where she was found extended on
the floor, and bathed in her blood. The men whose plot she had overheard,
having discovered that she had revealed their secret, murdered her. The poor
woman was dreadfully mangled: her throat was cut; and, not satisfied with that,
the assassins had also hacked her body with sharp instruments.  On the night of
the 10th of Niv√¥se the Rue Chantereine, in which Bonaparte had a small house
(No. 6), received, in pursuance of a decree of the department, the name of Rue
de la Victoire. The cries of "Vive Bonaparte!" and the incense prodigally
offered up to him, did not however seduce him from his retired habits. Lately
the conqueror and ruler of Italy, and now under men for whom he had no respect,
and who saw in him a formidable rival, he said to me one day, "The people of
Paris do not remember anything. Were I to remain here long, doing nothing, I
should be lost. In this great Babylon one reputation displaces another. Let me
be seen but three times at the theatre and I shall no longer excite attention;
so I shall go there but seldom." When he went he occupied a box shaded with
curtains. The manager of the opera wished to get up a special performance in
his honour; but he declined the offer. When I observed that it must be
agreeable to him to see his fellow-citizens so eagerly running after him, he
replied, "Bah! the people would crowd as fast to see me if I were going to the
scaffold."
