The Arabs harassed the army without intermission. The few wells met with in the
desert were either filled up or the water was rendered unfit for use. The
intolerable thirst with which the troops were tormented, even on this first
march, was but ill allayed by brackish and unwholesome water. The army crossed
the desert with the rapidity of lightning, scarcely tasting a drop of water.
The sufferings of the troops were frequently expressed by discouraging murmurs.
On the first night a mistake occurred which might have proved fatal. We were
advancing in the dark, under feeble escort, almost sleeping on our horses, when
suddenly we were assailed by two successive discharges of musketry. We aroused
ourselves and reconnoitred, and to our great satisfaction discovered that the
only mischief was a alight wound received by one of our guides. Our assailants
were the division of General Desaix, who, forming the advanced guard of the
army, mistook us for a party of the enemy, and fired upon us. It was speedily
ascertained that the little advanced guard of the headquarters had not heard
the "Qui vive?" of Desaix's advanced posts.  On reaching Damanhour our
headquarters were established at the residence of a sheik. The house had been
new whitened, and looked well enough outside, but the interior was
inconceivably wretched. Every domestic utensil was broken, and the only seats
were a few dirty tattered mats. Bonaparte knew that the sheik was rich, and
having somewhat won his confidence, he asked him, through the medium of the
interpreter, why, being in easy circumstances, he thus deprived himself of all
comfort. "Some years ago," replied the sheik, "I repaired and furnished my
house. When this became known at Cairo a demand was made upon me for money,
because it was said my expenses proved me to be rich. I refused to pay the
money, and in consequence I was ill-treated, and at length forced to pay it.
From that time I have allowed myself only the bare necessaries of life, and I
shall buy no furniture for my house." The old man was lame in consequence of
the treatment he had suffered. Woe to him who in this country is suspected of
having a competencyâ€”a hundred spies are always ready to denounce him. The
appearance of poverty is the only security against the rapine of power and the
cupidity of barbarism.  A little troop of Arabs on horseback assailed our
headquarters. Bonaparte, who was at the window of the sheik's house, indignant
at this insolence, turned to one of his aides de camp, who happened to be on
duty, and said, "Croisier, take a few guides and drive those fellows away!" In
an instant Croisier was in the plain with fifteen guides. A little skirmish
ensued, and we looked on from the window. In the movement and in the attack of
Croisier and his party there was a sort of hesitation which the
General-in-Chief could not comprehend. "Forward, I say! Charge!" he exclaimed
from the window, as if he could have been heard. Our horsemen seemed to fall
back as the Arabs returned to the attack; and after a little contest,
maintained with tolerable spirit, the Arabs retired without loss, and without
being molested in their retreat. Bonaparte could no longer repress his rage;
and when Croisier returned he experienced such a harsh reception that the poor
fellow withdrew deeply mortified and distressed. Bonaparte desired me to follow
him and say something to console him: but all was in vain. "I cannot survive
this," he said. "I will sacrifice my life on the first occasion that offers
itself. I will not live dishonoured." The word coward had escaped the General's
lips. Poor Croisier died at Saint Jean d'Acre.  On the 10th of July our
headquarters were established at Rahmahanie'h, where they remained during the
11th and 12th. At this place commences the canal which was cut by Alexander to
convey water to his new city; and to facilitate commercial intercourse between
Europe and the East.  The flotilla, commanded by the brave chief of division
Perree, had just arrived from Rosette. Perree was on board the xebec 'Cerf'.
