The catastrophe of Aboukir came like a thunderbolt upon the General-in-Chief.
In spite of all his energy and fortitude, he was deeply distressed by the
disasters which now assailed him. To the painful feelings excited by the
complaints and dejection of his companions in arms was now added the
irreparable misfortune of the burning of our fleet. He measured the fatal
consequences of this event at a single glance. We were now cut off from all
communication with France, and all hope of returning thither, except by a
degrading capitulation with an implacable and hated enemy. Bonaparte had lost
all chance of preserving his conquest, and to him this was indeed a bitter
reflection. And at what a time did this disaster befall him? At the very moment
when he was about to apply for the aid of the mother-country.  From what
General Bonaparte communicated to me previously to the 1st of August, his
object was, having once secured the possession of Egypt; to return to Toulon
with the fleet; then to send troops and provisions of every kind to Egypt; and
next to combine with the fleet all the forces that could be supplied, not only
by France, but by her allies, for the purpose of attacking England. It is
certain that previously to his departure for Egypt he had laid before the
Directory a note relative to his plans. He always regarded a descent upon
England as possible, though in its result fatal, so long as we should be
inferior in naval strength; but he hoped by various manoeuvres to secure a
superiority on one point.  His intention was to return to France. Availing
himself of the departure of the English fleet for the Mediterranean, the alarm
excited by his Egyptian expedition, the panic that would be inspired by his
sudden appearance at Boulogne, and his preparations against England, he hoped
to oblige that power to withdraw her naval force from the Mediterranean, and to
prevent her sending out troops to Egypt. This project was often in his head. He
would have thought it sublime to date an order of the day from the ruins of
Memphis, and three months later, one from London. The loss of the fleet
converted all these bold conceptions into mere romantic visions.  When alone
with me he gave free vent to his emotion. I observed to him that the disaster
was doubtless great, but that it would have been infinitely more irreparable
had Nelson fallen in with us at Malta, or had he waited for us four-and-twenty
hours before Alexandria, or in the open sea. "Any one of these events," said I,
"which were not only possible but probable, would have deprived us of every
resource. We are blockaded here, but we have provisions and money. Let us then
wait patiently to see what the Directory will do for us."â€”"The Directory!"
exclaimed he angrily, "the Directory is composed of a set of scoundrels! they
envy and hate me, and would gladly let me perish here. Besides, you see how
dissatisfied the whole army is: not a man is willing to stay." The pleasing
illusions which were cherished at the outset of the expedition vanished long
before our arrival in Cairo. Egypt was no longer the empire of the Ptolemies,
covered with populous and wealthy cities; it now presented one unvaried scene
of devastation and misery. Instead of being aided by the inhabitants, whom we
had ruined, for the sake of delivering them from the yoke of the beys, we found
all against us: Mamelukes, Arabs, and fellahs. No Frenchman was secure of his
life who happened to stray half a mile from any inhabited place, or the corps
to which he belonged. The hostility which prevailed against us and the
discontent of the army were clearly developed in the numerous letters which
were written to France at the time, and intercepted.  The gloomy reflections
which at first assailed Bonaparte, were speedily banished; and he soon
recovered the fortitude and presence of mind which had been for a moment shaken
by the overwhelming news from Aboukir. He, however, sometimes repeated, in a
tone which it would be difficult to describe, "Unfortunate Brueys, what have
you done!" I have remarked that in some chance observations which escaped
Napoleon at St. Helena he endeavoured to throw all the blame of the affair on
Admiral Brueys. Persons who are determined to make Bonaparte an exception to
human nature have unjustly reproached the Admiral for the loss of the fleet.
