Here and there he halted, accosted the little boys and girls, and smiled upon
the mothers. He visited the poor so long as he had any money; when he no longer
had any, he visited the rich.  As he made his cassocks last a long while, and
did not wish to have it noticed, he never went out in the town without his
wadded purple cloak. This inconvenienced him somewhat in summer.  On his
return, he dined. The dinner resembled his breakfast.  At half-past eight in
the evening he supped with his sister, Madame Magloire standing behind them and
serving them at table. Nothing could be more frugal than this repast. If,
however, the Bishop had one of his cures to supper, Madame Magloire took
advantage of the opportunity to serve Monseigneur with some excellent fish from
the lake, or with some fine game from the mountains. Every cure furnished the
pretext for a good meal: the Bishop did not interfere. With that exception, his
ordinary diet consisted only of vegetables boiled in water, and oil soup. Thus
it was said in the town, when the Bishop does not indulge in the cheer of a
cure, he indulges in the cheer of a trappist.  After supper he conversed for
half an hour with Mademoiselle Baptistine and Madame Magloire; then he retired
to his own room and set to writing, sometimes on loose sheets, and again on the
margin of some folio. He was a man of letters and rather learned. He left
behind him five or six very curious manuscripts; among others, a dissertation
on this verse in Genesis, In the beginning, the spirit of God floated upon the
waters. With this verse he compares three texts: the Arabic verse which says,
The winds of God blew; Flavius Josephus who says, A wind from above was
precipitated upon the earth; and finally, the Chaldaic paraphrase of Onkelos,
which renders it, A wind coming from God blew upon the face of the waters. In
another dissertation, he examines the theological works of Hugo, Bishop of
Ptolemais, great-grand-uncle to the writer of this book, and establishes the
fact, that to this bishop must be attributed the divers little works published
during the last century, under the pseudonym of Barleycourt.  Sometimes, in the
midst of his reading, no matter what the book might be which he had in his
hand, he would suddenly fall into a profound meditation, whence he only emerged
to write a few lines on the pages of the volume itself. These lines have often
no connection whatever with the book which contains them. We now have under our
eyes a note written by him on the margin of a quarto entitled Correspondence of
Lord Germain with Generals Clinton, Cornwallis, and the Admirals on the
American station. Versailles, Poincot, book-seller; and Paris, Pissot,
bookseller, Quai des Augustins.  Here is the note:â€” "Oh, you who are!
"Ecclesiastes calls you the All-powerful; the Maccabees call you the Creator;
the Epistle to the Ephesians calls you liberty; Baruch calls you Immensity; the
Psalms call you Wisdom and Truth; John calls you Light; the Books of Kings call
you Lord; Exodus calls you Providence; Leviticus, Sanctity; Esdras, Justice;
the creation calls you God; man calls you Father; but Solomon calls you
Compassion, and that is the most beautiful of all your names." Toward nine
o'clock in the evening the two women retired and betook themselves to their
chambers on the first floor, leaving him alone until morning on the ground
floor.
