Some time after the revolt of Cairo the necessity of ensuring our own safety
forced the commission of a terrible act of cruelty. A tribe of Arabs in the
neighbourhood of Cairo had surprised and massacred a party of French. The
General-in-Chief ordered his aide de camp Croisier to proceed to the spot,
surround the tribe, destroy the huts, kill all the men, and conduct the rest of
the population to Cairo. The order was to decapitate the victims, and bring
their heads in sacks to Cairo to be exhibited to the people. Eug√®ne Beauharnais
accompanied Croisier, who joyfully set out on this horrible expedition, in hope
of obliterating all recollection of the affair of Damanhour.  On the following
day the party returned. Many of the poor Arab women had been delivered on the
road, and the children had perished of hunger, heat, and fatigue. About four
o'clock a troop of asses arrived in Ezbekye'h Place, laden with sacks. The
sacks were opened and the heads rolled out before the assembled populace. I
cannot describe the horror I experienced; but I must nevertheless acknowledge
that this butchery ensured for a considerable time the tranquillity and even
the existence of the little caravans which were obliged to travel in all
directions for the service of the army.  Shortly before the loss of the fleet
the General-in Chief had formed the design of visiting Suez, to examine the
traces of the ancient canal which united the Nile to the Gulf of Arabia, and
also to cross the latter. The revolt at Cairo caused this project to be
adjourned until the month of December.  Before his departure for Suez,
Bonaparte granted the commissary Sucy leave to return to France. He had
received a wound in the right hand, when on board the xebec 'Cerf'. I was
conversing with him on deck when he received this wound. At first it had no
appearance of being serious; but some time after he could not use his hand.
General Bonaparte despatched a vessel with sick and wounded, who were supposed
to be incurable, to the number of about eighty. All envied their fate, and were
anxious to depart with them, but the privilege was conceded to very few.
However, those who were, disappointed had, no cause for regret. We never know
what we wish for. Captain Marengo, who landed at Augusta in Sicily, supposing
it to be a friendly land, was required to observe quarantine for twenty-two
days, and information was given of the arrival of the vessel to the court,
which was at Palermo. On the 25th of January 1799 all on board the French
vessel were massacred, with the exception of twenty-one who were saved by a
Neapolitan frigate, and conducted to Messing, where they were detained.  Before
he conceived the resolution of attacking the Turkish advanced guard in the
valleys of Syria, Bonaparte had formed a plan of invading British India from
Persia. He had ascertained, through the medium of agents, that the Shah of
Persia would, for a sum of money paid in advance, consent to the establishment
of military magazines on certain points of his territory. Bonaparte frequently
told me that if, after the subjugation of Egypt, he could have left 15,000 men
in that country, and have had 30,000 disposable troops, he would have marched
on the Euphrates. He was frequently speaking about the deserts which were to be
crossed to reach Persia.  How many times have I seen him extended on the
ground, examining the beautiful maps which he had brought with him, and he
would sometimes make me lie down in the same position to trace to me his
projected march. This reminded him of the triumphs of his favourite hero,
Alexander, with whom he so much desired to associate his name; but, at the same
time, he felt that these projects were incompatible with our resources, the
weakness of the Government; and the dissatisfaction which the army already
evinced. Privation and misery are inseparable from all these remote operations.
