Bonaparte took a rapid view of the destroyed ramparts of the town and returned
to the hospital, where there were men whose limbs had been amputated, many
wounded, many afflicted with ophthalmia, whose lamentations were distressing,
and some infected with the plague. The beds of the last description of patients
were to the right on entering the first ward. I walked by the General's side,
and I assert that I never saw him touch any one of the infected. And why should
he have done so? They were in the last stage of the disease. Not one of them
spoke a word to him, and Bonaparte well knew that he possessed no protection
against the plague. Is Fortune to be again brought forward here? She had, in
truth, little favoured him during the last few months, when he had trusted to
her favours. I ask, why should he have exposed himself to certain death, and
have left his army in the midst of a desert created by our ravages, in a
desolate town, without succour, and without the hope of ever receiving any?
Would he have acted rightly in doing soâ€”he who was evidently so necessary, so
indispensable to his army; he on whom depended at that moment the lives of all
who had survived the last disaster, and who had proved their attachment to him
by their sufferings, their privations, and their unshaken courage, and who had
done all that he could have required of men, and whose only trust was in him?
Bonaparte walked quickly through the rooms, tapping the yellow top of his boot
with a whip he held in his hand. As he passed along with hasty steps he
repeated these words: "The fortifications are destroyed. Fortune was against me
at St. Jean d'Acre. I must return to Egypt to preserve it from the enemy, who
will soon be there: In a few hours the Turks will be here. Let all those who
have strength enough rise and come along with us. They shall be carried on
litters and horses." There were scarcely sixty cases of plague in the hospital;
and all accounts stating a greater number are exaggerated. The perfect silence,
complete dejection, and general stupor of the patients announced their
approaching end. To carry them away in the state in which they were would
evidently have been doing nothing else than inoculating the rest of the army
with the plague. I have, it is true, learned, since my return to Europe, that
some persons touched the infected with impunity; nay; that others went so far
as to inoculate themselves with the plague in order to learn how to cure those
whom it might attack. It certainly was a special protection from Heaven to be
preserved from it; but to cover in some degree the absurdity of such a story,
it is added that they knew how to elude the danger, and that any one else who
braved it without using precautions met with death for their temerity. This is,
in fact, the whole point of the question. Either those privileged persons took
indispensable precautions; and in that case their boasted heroism is a mere
juggler's trick; or they touched the infected without using precautions, and
inoculated themselves with the plague, thus voluntarily encountering death, and
then the story is really a good one.  The infected were confided, it has been
stated, to the head apothecary of the army, Royer, who, dying in Egypt three
years after, carried the secret with him to the grave. But on a moment's
reflection it will be evident that the leaving of Royer alone in Jaffa would
have been to devote to certain death; and that a prompt and cruel one, a man
who was extremely useful to the army, and who was at the time in perfect
health. It must be remembered that no guard could be left with him, and that
the Turks were close at our heels. Bonaparte truly said, while walking through
the rooms of the hospital, that the Turks would be at Jaffa in a few hours.
With this conviction, would he have left the head apothecary in that town?
