Bonaparte had hardly set foot in Cairo when he was informed that the brave and
indefatigable Mourad Bey was descending by the Fayoum, in order to form a
junction with reinforcements which had been for some time past collected in the
Bohahire'h. In all probability this movement of Mourad Bey was the result of
news he had received respecting plans formed at Constantinople, and the landing
which took place a short time after in the roads of Aboukir. Mourad had
selected the Natron Lakes for his place of rendezvous. To these lakes Murat was
despatched. The Bey no sooner got notice of Murat's presence than he determined
to retreat and to proceed by the desert to Gizeh and the great Pyramids. I
certainly never heard, until I returned to France, that Mourad had ascended to
the summit of the great Pyramid for the purpose of passing his time in
contemplating Cairo!  Napoleon said at St. Helena that Murat might have taken
Mourad Bey had the latter remained four-and-twenty hours longer in the Natron
Lakes. Now the fact is, that as soon as the Bey heard of Murat's arrival he was
off. The Arabian spies were far more serviceable to our enemies than to us; we
had not, indeed, a single friend in Egypt. Mourad Bey, on being informed by the
Arabs, who acted as couriers for him, that General Desaix was despatching a
column from the south of Egypt against him, that the General-in-Chief was also
about to follow his footsteps along the frontier of Gizeh, and that the Natron
Lakes and the Bohahire'h were occupied by forces superior to his own, retired
into Fayoum.  Bonaparte attached great importance to the destruction of Mourad,
whom he looked upon as the bravest, the most active, and most dangerous of his
enemies in Egypt. As all accounts concurred in stating that Mourad, supported
by the Arabs, was hovering about the skirts of the desert of the province of
Gizeh, Bonaparte proceeded to the Pyramids, there to direct different corps
against that able and dangerous partisan. He, indeed, reckoned him so
redoubtable that he wrote to Murat, saying he wished fortune might reserve for
him the honour of putting the seal on the conquest of Egypt by the destruction
of this opponent.  On the 14th of July Bonaparte left Cairo for the Pyramids.
He intended spending three or four days in examining the ruins of the ancient
necropolis of Memphis; but he was suddenly obliged to alter his plan. This
journey to the Pyramids, occasioned by the course of war, has given an
opportunity for the invention of a little piece of romance. Some ingenious
people have related that Bonaparte gave audiences to the mufti and ulemas, and
that on entering one of the great Pyramids he cried out, "Glory to Allah! God
only is God, and Mahomet is his prophet!" Now the fact is, that Bonaparte never
even entered the great Pyramid. He never had any thought of entering it:â€”I
certainly should have accompanied him had he done so for I never quitted his
side a single moment in the desert. He caused some person to enter into one of
the great Pyramids while he remained outside, and received from them, on their
return, an account of what they had seen. In other words, they informed him
there was nothing to be seen!  On the evening of the 15th of July, while we
were taking a walk, we perceived, on the road leading from Alexandria, an Arab
riding up to us in all haste. He brought to the General-in-Chief a despatch
from General Marmont, who was entrusted with the command of Alexandria, and who
had conducted himself so well, especially during the dreadful ravages of the
plague, that he had gained the unqualified approbation of Bonaparte. The Turks
had landed on the 11th of July at Aboukir, under the escort and protection of
English ships of war. The news of the landing of from fifteen to sixteen
thousand men did not surprise Bonaparte, who had for some time expected it. It
was not so, however, with the generals most in his favor, whose apprehensions,
for reasons which may be conjectured, he had endeavoured to calm.
