Many wonderful and curious adventures have occurred in England, though their
recital would be out of place amongst these tales. Nevertheless, the present
story is appropriate to be told here to increase the number of these tales, and
is of a great lord of the kingdom of England, who was very rich and powerful,
and who, amongst all his servitors, had especial trust, confidence, and
affection in a young gentleman of his household, and that for various reasons.
And because of his loyalty, diligence, cunning, and prudence, and other good
qualities he found in him, he hid from him nothing concerning his love-affairs.
As time went on, the said young gentleman, by his cleverness, grew so much in
his master's favour, that he not only knew his master's love-affairs, but acted
as emissary and go-between on every occasion, as long as his master was
unmarried.  But a certain time after that, it happened that by the advice of
his relatives, friends, and well-wishers, my lord was married to a beautiful,
noble, good, and rich lady, much to the joy of many persons; and amongst other
our mignon was not the least joyful, as he said to himself that the marriage
would be to his master's welfare and honour, and would cause him he hoped to
cease from those pleasures of love which he had hitherto practised.  One day he
told the lord how glad he was that he had married a fair and good lady, for now
he would not need to have women sought for him as before. To which my lord
replied that nevertheless he did not intend to abandon all his love-affairs,
and although he was married would sometimes employ the young man's services.
The youth was not pleased to hear this, and replied that such amours should
cease now that his love was shared by a lady who excelled all others in beauty,
prudence, and goodness.  "Do as you please, my lord," said he, "but, for my
part, I will never carry a message to any woman if it is to prejudice my
mistress." "I know not what you mean by prejudice," said his master, "but you
must prepare to go to such and such ladies. For I would have you know that your
duties will be as they were before." "Oh, my lord," said the youth, "it seems
that you take a pleasure in abusing women, which is not right; for you know
well that all those you have named are not to be compared in beauty or other
respects to my lady, to whom you are offering a deadly insult if she should
ever hear of your misconduct. And what is more, you cannot be ignorant that in
so doing you damn your own soul." "Cease your preaching," said my lord, "and do
as I command." "Pardon me, my lord," said the youth. "I would rather die than,
through my means, trouble should arise between you and my lady; and I beg of
you to be satisfied with me as I am, for certainly I will no more act as I once
used." My lord, who saw how obstinate the young man was, pressed him no more at
that time. But three or four days after that, without alluding to the
conversation they had had, he demanded of the young man, amongst other things,
what dish he preferred, and he replied that no dish pleased him so much as eel
pasties.  "By St. John, it is a good dish," said his master; "you have not
chosen badly." That being said, my lord retired, and caused to be sent to him
his major-domo, whom he charged by his obedience that he should serve to the
young man nothing but eel pasties, whatsoever he might say or do; and the
major-domo promised to perform his commands, which he did, for on the same day,
as the said youth was seated at table in his chamber, his servant brought unto
him many fair and large eel pasties which had been delivered to him from the
kitchen,â€”at which he was pleased, and ate his fill.  On the morrow it was the
same, and the five or six following days he was brought like pasties, of which
he was already weary. So the youth asked of his servants why they brought him
nothing but these pasties?
