The two convents being close together, there was always a barn for the
threshers, as the saying is, for, thank God, the nuns were so kind-hearted that
few who sought amorous intercourse with them were refused, provided only they
were worthy to receive their favours.  But, to come to the story, there was
amongst these white monks, a young and handsome monk who fell in love with one
of the nuns, and after some preliminaries, had the courage to ask her for the
love of God to grant him her favours.  The nun, who knew how he was furnished,
though she was by nature courteous, gave him a harsh and sharp reply. He was
not to be rebuffed, however, but continued to implore her love with most humble
requests, until the pretty nun was forced either to lose her reputation for
courtesy, or give the monk what she had granted to many others as soon as she
was asked.  She said to him; "Truly you weary me with requests for that which
honestly I ought not to give you. But I have heard what sort of weapon you
carry, and if it be so you have not much to thank Nature for." "I do not know
who told you," replied the monk, "but I am sure that you will be satisfied with
me, and I will prove to you that I am as good a man as any other." "Oh, yes. I
believe you are a man," said she "but your machine is so small that if you were
to put it in a certain place, I should hardly know that it was there." "It is
quite the reverse," said the monk, "and, if I were in that place, I would do so
well that you would confess that those who gave me that reputation were liars."
After these fair speeches, the kind nun, that she might know what he could do,
and perhaps not forgetting her own share in the pleasure, told him to come to
the window of her cell at midnight; for which favour he thanked her gratefully.
"But at any rate," said she, "you shall not enter until I really know what sort
of lance you carry, and whether you can be of use to me or not." "As you
please," replied the monk, and with that he quitted his mistress, and went
straight to Brother Conrad, one of his companions, who was furnished, God knows
how well, and for that reason was much esteemed in the nunnery.  To him the
young monk related how he had begged a favour of such an one, and how she had
refused, doubting whether his foot would fit her shoe, but in the end had
consented that he should come to her, but would first feel and know with what
sort of lance he would charge against her shield.  "I have not," said he, "a
fine thick lance, such as I know she would desire to meet. Therefore I beg of
you with all my heart, to come with me this night at the hour when I am to meet
her, and you will do me the greatest service that ever one man did to another.
I know very well that she will want to touch and handle the lance, and this is
what you must do. You will be behind me; but do not speak. Then take my place,
and put your great machine in her hand. She will open the door then, I expect,
and you will go away and I will enter in,â€”and leave the rest to me." Brother
Conrad greatly doubted whether it would happen as his friend wished, but he
agreed to do as he was asked. At the appointed hour they set forth to visit the
nun. When they came to the window, the young monk, who was more eager than a
stallion, knocked once with his stick, and the nun did not wait for him to
knock a second time, but opened the window, and said in a low voice; "Who is
there?" "It is I," he replied; "Open your door, lest anyone should hear us."
"By my faith," quoth she, "you shall not be entered on the roll of my lovers,
until you have passed a review, and I know what equipments you have. Come
hither, and show me what it is like."
