You may guess that Katherine was grieved and vexed at seeing her lover, whom
she adored more than anyone in the world, thus troubled. Had it not been for
the virtue with which God had largely endowed her, she would have proposed to
accompany him on his travels, but she hoped for happier days, and refrained
from making such a proposal. After a pause, she replied; "My friend you must go
away, but do not forget her who has given you her heart. And that you may have
courage in the struggle which is imposed on you, know that I promise you on my
word that as long as I live I will never marry any man but you of my own
free-will, provided that you are equally loyal and true to me, as I hope you
will be. And in proof of this, I give you this ring, which is of gold enamelled
with black tears. If by chance they would marry me to some one else, I will
defend myself so stoutly that you will be pleased with me, and I will prove to
you that I can keep my promise without flinching from it. And, lastly, I beg of
you that wherever you may stop, you will send me news about yourself, and I
will do the same." "Ah, my dear mistress," said Gerard, "I see plainly that I
must leave you for a time. I pray to God that he will give you more joy and
happiness than I am likely to have. You have kindly given me, though I am not
worthy of it, a noble and honourable promise, for which I cannot sufficiently
thank you. Still less do I deserve it, but I venture in return to make a
similar promise, begging most humbly and with all my heart, that my vow may
have as great a weight as if it came from a much nobler man than I. Adieu,
dearest lady. My eyes demand their turn, and prevent my tongue from speaking."
With these words he kissed her, and pressed her tightly to his bosom, and then
each went away to think over his or her griefs.  God knows that they wept with
their eyes, their hearts, and their heads, but ere they showed themselves, they
concealed all traces of their grief, and put on a semblance of cheerfulness.
To cut matters short, Gerard did so much in a few days that he obtained leave
of absence from his masterâ€”which was not very difficult, not that he had
committed any fault, but owing to his love affair with Katherine, with which
her friends were not best pleased, seeing that Gerard was not of such a good
family or so rich as she was, and could not expect to marry her.  So Gerard
left, and covered such a distance in one day that he came to Barrois, where he
found shelter in the castle of a great nobleman of the country; and being
safely housed he soon sent news of himself to the lady, who was very joyful
thereat, and by the same messenger wrote to tell him of her condition, and the
goodwill she bore him, and how she would always be loyal to him.  Now you must
know that as soon as Gerard had left Brabant, many gentlemen, knights and
squires, came to Katherine, desiring above all things to make her acquaintance,
which during the time that Gerard had been there they had been unable to do,
knowing that her heart was already occupied.  Indeed many of them demanded her
hand in marriage of her father, and amongst them was one who seemed to him a
very suitable match. So he called together many of his friends, and summoned
his fair daughter, and told them that he was already growing old, and that one
of the greatest pleasures he could have in the world was to see his daughter
well married before he died. Moreover, he said to them; "A certain gentleman
has asked for my daughter's hand, and he seems to me a suitable match. If your
opinion agrees with mine, and my daughter will obey me, his honourable request
will not be rejected." All his friends and relations approved of the proposed
marriage, on account of the virtues, riches, and other gifts of the said
gentleman. But when they asked the opinion of the fair Katherine, she sought to
excuse herself, and gave several reasons for refusing, or at least postponing
this marriage, but at last she saw that she would be in the bad books of her
father, her mother, her relatives, friends, and her master and mistress, if she
continued to keep her promise to her lover, Gerard.
