None of the preceding stories have related any incidents which happened in
Italy, but only those which occurred in France, Germany, England, Flanders, and
Brabant,â€”therefore I will relate, as something new, an incident which formerly
happened in Rome, and was as follows.  At Rome was a Scotsman of the age of
about 22, who for the space of fourteen years had disguised himself as a woman,
without it being publicly known all that time that he was a man. He called
himself Margaret, and there was hardly a good house in Rome where he was not
known, and he was specially welcomed by all the women, such as waiting-women,
and wenches of the lower orders, and also many of the greatest ladies in Rome.
This worthy Scotsman carried on the trade of laundress, and had learned to
bleach sheets, and called himself the washerwoman, and under that pretence
frequented, as has been said, all the best houses in Rome, for there was no
woman who could bleach sheets as he did.  But you must know that he did much
else beside, for when he found himself with some pretty girl, he showed her
that he was a man. Often, in order to prepare the lye, he stopped one or two
nights in the aforesaid houses, and they made him sleep with the maid, or
sometimes with the daughter; and very often, if her husband were not there, the
mistress would have his company. And God knows that he had a good time, and,
thanks to the way he employed his body, was welcome everywhere, and many
wenches and waiting maids would fight as to who was to have him for a
bedfellow.  The citizens of Rome heard such a good account of him from their
wives, that they willingly welcomed him to their houses, and if they went
abroad, were glad to have Margaret to keep house along with their wives, and,
what is more, made her sleep with them, so good and honest was she esteemed, as
has been already said.  For the space of fourteen years did Margaret continue
this way of living, but the mischief was at last brought to light by a young
girl, who told her father that she had slept with Margaret and been assaulted
by her, and that in reality she was a man. The father informed the officers of
justice, and it was found that she had all the members and implements that men
carry, and, in fact, was a man and not a woman.  So it was ordered that he
should be put in a cart and led through all the city of Rome, and at every
street corner his genitals should be exposed.  This was done, and God knows how
ashamed and vexed poor Margaret was. But you must know that when the cart
stopped at a certain corner, and all the belongings of Margaret were being
exhibited, a Roman said out loud; "Look at that scoundrel! he has slept more
than twenty nights with my wife!" Many others said the same, and many who did
not say it knew it well, but, for their honours sake, held their tongue. Thus,
in the manner you have heard, was the poor Scotsman punished for having
pretended to be a woman, and after that punishment was banished from Rome; at
which the women were much displeased, for never was there such a good
laundress, and they were very sorry that they had so unfortunately lost her.
