Gugemar was wounded twice overâ€”by the arrow, and by the words he was dismayed
to hear. He considered within himself to what land he must go to find this
healing for his hurt, for he was yet too young to die. He saw clearly, and told
it to his heart, that there was no lady in his life to whom he could run for
pity, and be made whole of his wound. He called his varlet before him,

"Friend," said he, "go forthwith, and bring my comrades to this place, for I
have to speak with them."

The varlet went upon his errand, leaving his master sick with the heat and
fever of his hurt. When he was gone, Gugemar tore the hem from his shirt, and
bound it straitly about his wound. He climbed painfully upon the saddle, and
departed without more ado, for he was with child to be gone before any could
come to stay him from his purpose. A green path led through the deep forest to
the plain, and his way across the plain brought him to a cliff, exceeding high,
and to the sea. Gugemar looked upon the water, which was very still, for this
fair harbourage was land-locked from the main. Upon this harbour lay one only
vessel, bearing a rich pavilion of silk, daintily furnished both without and
within, and well it seemed to Gugemar that he had seen this ship before.
Beneath the sky was no ship so rich or precious, for there was not a sail but
was spun of silk, and not a plank, from keel to mast, but showed of ebony. Too
fair was the nave for mortal man, and Gugemar held it in sore displeasure. He
marvelled greatly from what country it had come, and wondered long concerning
this harbour, and the ship that lay therein. Gugemar got him down from his
horse upon the shore, and with mighty pain and labour climbed within the ship.
He trusted to find merchantmen and sailors therein, but there was none to
guard, and none he saw. Now within the pavilion was a very rich bed, carved by
cunning workmen in the days of King Solomon. This fair bed was wrought of
cypress wood and white ivory, adorned with gold and gems most precious. Right
sweet were the linen cloths upon the bed, and so soft the pillow, that he who
lay thereon would sleep, were he sadder than any other in the world. The
counterpane was of purple from the vats of Alexandria, and over all was set a
right fair coverlet of cloth of gold. The pavilion was litten by two great
waxen torches, placed in candlesticks of fine gold, decked with jewels worth a
lord's ransom. So the wounded knight looked on ship and pavilion, bed and
candle, and marvelled greatly. Gugemar sat him down upon the bed for a little,
because of the anguish of his wound. After he had rested a space he got upon
his feet, that he might quit the vessel, but he found that for him there was no
return. A gentle wind had filled the sails, and already he was in the open sea.
When Gugemar saw that he was far from land, he was very heavy and sorrowful. He
knew not what to do, by reason of the mightiness of his hurt. But he must
endure the adventure as best he was able; so he prayed to God to take him in
His keeping, and in His good pleasure to bring him safe to port, and deliver
him from the peril of death. Then climbing upon the couch, he laid his head
upon the pillow, and slept as one dead, until, with vespers, the ship drew to
that haven where he might find the healing for his hurt.

Gugemar had come to an ancient city, where the King of that realm held his
court and state. This King was full of years, and was wedded to a dame of high
degree. The lady was of tender age, passing fresh and fair, and sweet of speech
to all. Therefore was the King jealous of his wife beyond all measure. Such is
the wont of age, for much it fears that old and young cannot mate together, and
that youth will turn to youth. This is the death in life of the old.
