So the knight rendered the sark to his lady, and made such bargain as she
wished, for the peace and assurance of her mind.

For his part the knight took a fair girdle, and girt it closely about the
lady's middle. Right secret was the clasp and buckle of this girdle. Therefore
he required of the dame that she would never grant her love, save to him only,
who might free her from the strictness of this bond, without injury to band or
clasp. Then they kissed together, and entered into such covenant as you have
heard.

That very day their hidden love was made plain to men. A certain chamberlain
was sent by that ancient lord with a message to the Queen. This unlucky wretch,
finding that in no wise could he enter within the chamber, looked through the
window, and saw. Forthwith he hastened to the King, and told him that which he
had seen. When the ag√®d lord understood these words, never was there a sadder
man than he. He called together the most trusty sergeants of his guard, and
coming with them to the Queen's chamber, bade them to thrust in the door. When
Gugemar was found therein, the King commanded that he should be slain with the
sword, by reason of the anguish that was his. Gugemar was in no whit dismayed
by the threat. He started to his feet, and gazing round, marked a stout rod of
fir, on which it is the use for linen to be hung. This he took in hand, and
faced his foes, bidding them have a care, for he would do a mischief to them
all. The King looked earnestly upon the fearless knight, inquiring of him who
he was, and where he was born, and in what manner he came to dwell within his
house. So Gugemar told over to him this story of his fate. He showed him of the
Beast that he had wounded to his hurt; of the nave, and of his bitter wound; of
how he came within the realm, and of the lady's surgery. He told all to the
ancient lord, to the last moment when he stood within his power. The King
replied that he gave no credence to his word, nor believed that the story ran
as he had said. If, however, the vessel might be found, he would commit the
knight again to the waves. He would go the more heavily for the knight's
saining, and a glad day would it be if he made shipwreck at sea. When they had
entered into this covenant together, they went forth to the harbour, and there
discovered the barge, even as Gugemar had said. So they set him thereon, and
prayed him to return unto his own realm.

Without sail or oar the ship parted from that coast, with no further tarrying.
The knight wept and wrung his hands, complaining of his lady's loss, and of her
cherishing. He prayed the mighty God to grant him speedy death, and never to
bring him home, save to meet again with her who was more desirable than life.
Whilst he was yet at his orisons, the ship drew again to that port, from whence
she had first come. Gugemar made haste to get him from the vessel, so that he
might the more swiftly return to his own land. He had gone but a little way
when he was aware of a squire of his household, riding in the company of a
certain knight. This squire held the bridle of a destrier in his hand, though
no man rode thereon. Gugemar called to him by name, so that the varlet looking
upon him, knew again his lord. He got him to his feet, and bringing the
destrier to his master, set the knight thereon. Great was the joy, and merry
was the feast, when Gugemar returned to his own realm. But though his friends
did all that they were able, neither song nor game could cheer the knight, nor
turn him from dwelling in his unhappy thoughts. For peace of mind they urged
that he took to himself a wife, but Gugemar would have none of their counsel.
Never would he wed a wife, on any day, either for love or for wealth, save only
that she might first unloose the knot within his shirt. When this news was
noised about the country, there was neither dame nor damsel in the realm of
Brittany, but essayed to unfasten the knot. But there was no lady who could
gain to her wish, whether by force or guile.
