That night the Duke lay upon a bed of little ease. He could neither sleep nor
rest, by reason of that lord, his friend, who, he was persuaded, had done him
such bitter wrong as justly to have forfeited his love. Because of this he kept
vigil the whole night through. He rose very early on the morrow, and bade him
come whom his wife had put to blame, although he had done nothing blameworthy.
Then he took him to task, man to man, when there were but these two together.

"Certes," he said, "it is a heavy grief that you who are so comely and brave,
should yet have no honour in you. You have deceived me the more, for I have
long believed you to be a man of good faith, giving loyalty, at least, to me,
in return for the love I have given to you. I know not how you can have
harboured such a felon's wish, as to pray and require the Duchess to grant you
her grace. You are guilty of such treachery that conduct more vile it would be
far to seek. Get you hence from my realm. You have my leave to part, and it is
denied to you for ever. If you return here it will be at your utmost peril, for
I warn you beforehand that if I lay hands upon you, you will die a shameful
death."

When the knight heard this judgment, such wrath and mortification were his that
his members trembled beneath him. He called to mind his friend, of whom he
would have no joy, if he might not come and go and sojourn in that realm from
which the Duke had banished him. Moreover he was sick at heart that his lord
should deem him a disloyal traitor, without just cause. He knew such sore
discomfort that he held himself as dead and betrayed.

"Sire," said he, "for the love of God believe this never, neither think that I
have been so bold. To do that of which you wrongfully charge me, has never
entered my mind, not one day, nor for one single hour. Who has told you this
lie has wrought a great ill."

"You gain nothing by such denials," answered the Duke, "for of a surety the
thing is true. I have heard from her own lips the very guise and fashion in
which you prayed and required her love, like the envious traitor that you are.
Many another word it may well be that you spoke, as to which the lady of her
courtesy keeps silence."

"My lady says what it pleases her to say," replied the dolorous knight, "and my
denials are lighter than her word. Naught is there for me to say; nothing is
left for me to do, so that I may be believed that this adventure never
happened."

"Happen it did, by my soul," said the Duke, remembering certain words of his
wife. Well he deemed that he might be assured of the truth, if but the lady's
testimony were true that this lord had never loved otherwhere. Therefore the
Duke said to the knight, "If you will pledge your faith to answer truly what I
may ask, I shall be certified by your words whether or not you have done this
deed of which I misdoubt you."

The knight had but one desireâ€”to turn aside his lord's wrath, which had so
wrongfully fallen upon him. He feared only lest he should be driven from the
land where lodged the dame who was the closest to his mind. Knowing nothing of
what was in the Duke's thought, he considered that his question could only
concern the one matter; so he replied that without fraud or concealment he
would do as his lord had said. Thus he pledged his faith, and the Duke accepted
his affiance.
