About that there was no doubt. At Pontoise, at Gournay, at Forges,
Chief-inspector Ganimard, who was sent specially from Paris, with Inspector
Folenfant, as his assistant, ascertained that a motor car had passed in the
course of the previous night. The same on the road from Dieppe to Ambrumesy.
And, though the traces of the car were lost at about a mile and a half from the
chateau, at least a number of footmarks were seen between the little door in
the park wall and the abbey ruins. Besides, Ganimard remarked that the lock of
the little door had been forced.

So all was explained. It remained to decide which inn the doctor had spoken of:
an easy piece of work for a Ganimard, a professional ferret, a patient old
stager of the police. The number of inns is limited and this one, given the
condition of the wounded man, could only be one quite close to Ambrumesy.
Ganimard and Sergeant Quevillon set to work. Within a circle of five hundred
yards, of a thousand yards, of fifteen hundred yards, they visited and
ransacked everything that could pass for an inn. But, against all expectation,
the dying man persisted in remaining invisible.

Ganimard became more resolved than ever. He came back to sleep at the chateau,
on the Saturday night, with the intention of making his personal inquiry on the
Sunday. On Sunday morning, he learned that, during the night, a posse of
gendarmes had seen a figure gliding along the sunk road, outside the wall. Was
it an accomplice who had come back to investigate? Were they to suppose that
the leader of the gang had not left the cloisters or the neighborhood of the
cloisters?

That night, Ganimard openly sent the squad of gendarmes to the farm and posted
himself and Folenfant outside the walls, near the little door.

A little before midnight, a person passed out of the wood, slipped between
them, went through the door and entered the park. For three hours, they saw him
wander from side to side across the ruins, stooping, climbing up the old
pillars, sometimes remaining for long minutes without moving. Then he went back
to the door and again passed between the two inspectors.

Ganimard caught him by the collar, while Folenfant seized him round the body.
He made no resistance of any kind and, with the greatest docility, allowed them
to bind his wrists and take him to the house. But, when they attempted to
question him, he replied simply that he owed them no account of his doings and
that he would wait for the arrival of the examining magistrate. Thereupon, they
fastened him firmly to the foot of a bed, in one of the two adjoining rooms
which they occupied.

At nine o'clock on Monday morning, as soon as M. Filleul had arrived, Ganimard
announced the capture which he had made. The prisoner was brought downstairs.
It was Isidore Beautrelet.

"M. Isidore Beautrelet!" exclaimed M. Filleul with an air of rapture, holding
out both his hands to the newcomer. "What a delightful surprise! Our excellent
amateur detective here! And at our disposal too! Why, it's a windfall!â€”M.
Chief-inspector, allow me to introduce to you M. Isidore Beautrelet, a
sixth-form pupil at the Lycee Janson-de-Sailly."

Ganimard seemed a little nonplussed. Isidore made him a very low bow, as though
he were greeting a colleague whom he knew how to esteem at his true value, and,
turning to M. Filleul:

"It appears, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, that you have received a
satisfactory account of me?"
