"With your ordinary sort of adversary, yes. But, given an enemy endowed with a
certain amount of cunning, the facts are those which he happens to have
selected. Take the famous clues upon which you base your inquiry: why, he was
at liberty to arrange them as he liked. And you see where that can lead you,
into what mistakes and absurdities, when you are dealing with a man like Arsene
Lupin. Holmlock Shears himself fell into the trap."

"Arsene Lupin is dead."

"No matter. His gang remains and the pupils of such a master are masters
themselves."

M. Filleul took Isidore by the arm and, leading him away:

"Words, young man, words. Here is something of more importance. Listen to me.
Ganimard is otherwise engaged at this moment and will not be here for a few
days. On the other hand, the Comte de Gesvres has telegraphed to Holmlock
Shears, who has promised his assistance next week. Now don't you think, young
man, that it would be a feather in our cap if we were able to say to those two
celebrities, on the day of their arrival, 'Awfully sorry, gentlemen, but we
couldn't wait. The business is done'?"

It was impossible for M. Filleul to confess helplessness with greater candor.
Beautrelet suppressed a smile and, pretending not to see through the worthy
magistrate, replied:

"I confess. Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, that, if I was not present at your
inquiry just now, it was because I hoped that you would consent to tell me the
results. May I ask what you have learned?"

"Well, last night, at eleven o'clock, the three gendarmes whom Sergeant
Quevillon had left on guard at the chateau received a note from the sergeant
telling them to hasten with all speed to Ouville, where they are stationed.
They at once rode off, and when they arrived at Ouvilleâ€”"

"They discovered that they had been tricked, that the order was a forgery and
that there was nothing for them to do but return to Ambrumesy."

"This they did, accompanied by Sergeant Quevillon. But they were away for an
hour and a half and, during this time, the crime was committed."

"In what circumstances?"

"Very simple circumstances, indeed. A ladder was removed from the farm
buildings and placed against the second story of the chateau. A pane of glass
was cut out and a window opened. Two men, carrying a dark lantern, entered
Mlle. de Gesvres's room and gagged her before she could cry out. Then, after
binding her with cords, they softly opened the door of the room in which Mlle.
de Saint-Veran was sleeping. Mlle. de Gesvres heard a stifled moan, followed by
the sound of a person struggling. A moment later, she saw two men carrying her
cousin, who was also bound and gagged. They passed in front of her and went out
through the window. Then Mlle. de Gesvres, terrified and exhausted, fainted."

"But what about the dogs? I thought M. de Gesvres had bought two almost wild
sheep-dogs, which were let loose at night?"
