With this exception, he was in all things just, true, equitable, intelligent,
humble and dignified, beneficent and kindly, which is only another sort of
benevolence. He was a priest, a sage, and a man. It must be admitted, that even
in the political views with which we have just reproached him, and which we are
disposed to judge almost with severity, he was tolerant and easy, more so,
perhaps, than we who are speaking here. The porter of the town-hall had been
placed there by the Emperor. He was an old non-commissioned officer of the old
guard, a member of the Legion of Honor at Austerlitz, as much of a Bonapartist
as the eagle. This poor fellow occasionally let slip inconsiderate remarks,
which the law then stigmatized as seditious speeches. After the imperial
profile disappeared from the Legion of Honor, he never dressed himself in his
regimentals, as he said, so that he should not be obliged to wear his cross. He
had himself devoutly removed the imperial effigy from the cross which Napoleon
had given him; this made a hole, and he would not put anything in its place. "I
will die," he said, "rather than wear the three frogs upon my heart!" He liked
to scoff aloud at Louis XVIII. "The gouty old creature in English gaiters!" he
said; "let him take himself off to Prussia with that queue of his." He was
happy to combine in the same imprecation the two things which he most detested,
Prussia and England. He did it so often that he lost his place. There he was,
turned out of the house, with his wife and children, and without bread. The
Bishop sent for him, reproved him gently, and appointed him beadle in the
cathedral.  In the course of nine years Monseigneur Bienvenu had, by dint of
holy deeds and gentle manners, filled the town of D——with a sort of tender and
filial reverence. Even his conduct towards Napoleon had been accepted and
tacitly pardoned, as it were, by the people, the good and weakly flock who
adored their emperor, but loved their bishop.
