He recognized the fact that he was not an innocent man unjustly punished. He
admitted that he had committed an extreme and blameworthy act; that that loaf
of bread would probably not have been refused to him had he asked for it; that,
in any case, it would have been better to wait until he could get it through
compassion or through work; that it is not an unanswerable argument to say,
"Can one wait when one is hungry?" That, in the first place, it is very rare
for any one to die of hunger, literally; and next, that, fortunately or
unfortunately, man is so constituted that he can suffer long and much, both
morally and physically, without dying; that it is therefore necessary to have
patience; that that would even have been better for those poor little children;
that it had been an act of madness for him, a miserable, unfortunate wretch, to
take society at large violently by the collar, and to imagine that one can
escape from misery through theft; that that is in any case a poor door through
which to escape from misery through which infamy enters; in short, that he was
in the wrong.  Then he asked himselfâ€” Whether he had been the only one in fault
in his fatal history. Whether it was not a serious thing, that he, a laborer,
out of work, that he, an industrious man, should have lacked bread. And
whether, the fault once committed and confessed, the chastisement had not been
ferocious and disproportioned. Whether there had not been more abuse on the
part of the law, in respect to the penalty, than there had been on the part of
the culprit in respect to his fault. Whether there had not been an excess of
weights in one balance of the scale, in the one which contains expiation.
Whether the over-weight of the penalty was not equivalent to the annihilation
of the crime, and did not result in reversing the situation, of replacing the
fault of the delinquent by the fault of the repression, of converting the
guilty man into the victim, and the debtor into the creditor, and of ranging
the law definitely on the side of the man who had violated it.  Whether this
penalty, complicated by successive aggravations for attempts at escape, had not
ended in becoming a sort of outrage perpetrated by the stronger upon the
feebler, a crime of society against the individual, a crime which was being
committed afresh every day, a crime which had lasted nineteen years.  He asked
himself whether human society could have the right to force its members to
suffer equally in one case for its own unreasonable lack of foresight, and in
the other case for its pitiless foresight; and to seize a poor man forever
between a defect and an excess, a default of work and an excess of punishment.
Whether it was not outrageous for society to treat thus precisely those of its
members who were the least well endowed in the division of goods made by
chance, and consequently the most deserving of consideration.  These questions
put and answered, he judged society and condemned it.  He condemned it to his
hatred.  He made it responsible for the fate which he was suffering, and he
said to himself that it might be that one day he should not hesitate to call it
to account. He declared to himself that there was no equilibrium between the
harm which he had caused and the harm which was being done to him; he finally
arrived at the conclusion that his punishment was not, in truth, unjust, but
that it most assuredly was iniquitous.
