He remained in this situation, and would have so remained indefinitely, even
until daybreak, had not the clock struck oneâ€”the half or quarter hour. It
seemed to him that that stroke said to him, "Come on!" He rose to his feet,
hesitated still another moment, and listened; all was quiet in the house; then
he walked straight ahead, with short steps, to the window, of which he caught a
glimpse. The night was not very dark; there was a full moon, across which
coursed large clouds driven by the wind. This created, outdoors, alternate
shadow and gleams of light, eclipses, then bright openings of the clouds; and
indoors a sort of twilight. This twilight, sufficient to enable a person to see
his way, intermittent on account of the clouds, resembled the sort of livid
light which falls through an air-hole in a cellar, before which the passersby
come and go. On arriving at the window, Jean Valjean examined it. It had no
grating; it opened in the garden and was fastened, according to the fashion of
the country, only by a small pin. He opened it; but as a rush of cold and
piercing air penetrated the room abruptly, he closed it again immediately. He
scrutinized the garden with that attentive gaze which studies rather than
looks. The garden was enclosed by a tolerably low white wall, easy to climb.
Far away, at the extremity, he perceived tops of trees, spaced at regular
intervals, which indicated that the wall separated the garden from an avenue or
lane planted with trees.  Having taken this survey, he executed a movement like
that of a man who has made up his mind, strode to his alcove, grasped his
knapsack, opened it, fumbled in it, pulled out of it something which he placed
on the bed, put his shoes into one of his pockets, shut the whole thing up
again, threw the knapsack on his shoulders, put on his cap, drew the visor down
over his eyes, felt for his cudgel, went and placed it in the angle of the
window; then returned to the bed, and resolutely seized the object which he had
deposited there. It resembled a short bar of iron, pointed like a pike at one
end. It would have been difficult to distinguish in that darkness for what
employment that bit of iron could have been designed. Perhaps it was a lever;
possibly it was a club.  In the daytime it would have been possible to
recognize it as nothing more than a miner's candlestick. Convicts were, at that
period, sometimes employed in quarrying stone from the lofty hills which
environ Toulon, and it was not rare for them to have miners' tools at their
command. These miners' candlesticks are of massive iron, terminated at the
lower extremity by a point, by means of which they are stuck into the rock.  He
took the candlestick in his right hand; holding his breath and trying to deaden
the sound of his tread, he directed his steps to the door of the adjoining
room, occupied by the Bishop, as we already know.  On arriving at this door, he
found it ajar. The Bishop had not closed it.
