Being on the point of commending to you and to posterity the memory of the late
Etienne de la Boetie, as well for his extreme virtue as for the singular
affection which he bore to me, it struck me as an indiscretion very serious in
its results, and meriting some coercion from our laws, the practice which often
prevails of robbing virtue of glory, its faithful associate, in order to confer
it, in accordance with our private interests and without discrimination, on the
first comer; seeing that our two principal guiding reins are reward and
punishment, which only touch us properly, and as men, through the medium of
honour and dishonour, forasmuch as these penetrate the mind, and come home to
our most intimate feelings: just where animals themselves are susceptible, more
or less, to all other kinds of recompense and corporal chastisement. Moreover,
it is well to notice that the custom of praising virtue, even in those who are
no longer with us, impalpable as it is to them, serves as a stimulant to the
living to imitate their example; just as capital sentences are carried out by
the law, more for the sake of warning to others, than in relation to those who
suffer. Now, commendation and its opposite being analogous as regards effects,
we cannot easily deny the fact, that although the law prohibits one man from
slandering the reputation of another, it does not prevent us from bestowing
reputation without cause. This pernicious licence in respect to the
distribution of praise, has formerly been confined in its area of operations;
and it may be the reason why poetry once lost favour with the more judicious.
However this may be, it cannot be concealed that the vice of falsehood is one
very unbecoming in gentleman, let it assume what guise it will.  As for that
personage of whom I am speaking to you, sir he leads me far away indeed from
this kind of language; for the danger in his case is not, lest I should lend
him anything, but that I might take something from him; and it is his
ill-fortune that, while he has supplied me, so far as ever a man could, with
just and obvious opportunities for commendation, I find myself unable and
unqualified to render it to him —I, who am his debtor for so many vivid
communications, and who alone have it in my power to answer for a million of
accomplishments, perfections, and virtues, latent (thanks to his unkind stars)
in so noble a soul. For the nature of things having (I know not how) permitted
that truth, fair and acceptable—as it may be of itself, is only embraced where
there are arts of persuasion, to insinuate it into our minds, I see myself so
wanting, both in authority to support my simple testimony, and in the eloquence
requisite for lending it value and weight, that I was on the eve of
relinquishing the task, having nothing of his which would enable me to exhibit
to the world a proof of his genius and knowledge.
