In truth, sir, having been overtaken by his fate in the flower of his age, and
in the full enjoyment of the most vigorous health, it had been his design to
publish some day works which would have demonstrated to posterity what sort of
a man he was; and, peradventure, he was indifferent enough to fame, having
formed such a plan in his head, to proceed no further in it. But I have come to
the conclusion, that it was far more excusable in him to bury with him all his
rare endowments, than it would be on my part to bury also with me the knowledge
of them which I had acquired from him; and, therefore, having collected with
care all the remains which I found scattered here and there among his papers, I
intend to distribute them so as to recommend his memory to as many persons as
possible, selecting the most suitable and worthy of my acquaintance, and those
whose testimony might do him greatest honour: such as you, sir, who may very
possibly have had some knowledge of him during his life, but assuredly too
slight to discover the perfect extent of his worth. Posterity may credit me, if
it chooses, when I swear upon my conscience, that I knew and saw him to be such
as, all things considered, I could neither desire nor imagine a genius
surpassing his.  I beg you very humbly, sir, not only to take his name under
your general protection, but also these ten or twelve French stanzas, which lay
themselves, as of necessity, under shadow of your patronage. For I will not
disguise from you, that their publication was deferred, upon the appearance of
his other writings, under the pretext (as it was alleged yonder at Paris) that
they were too crude to come to light. You will judge, sir, how much truth there
is in this; and since it is thought that hereabout nothing can be produced in
our own dialect but what is barbarous and unpolished, it falls to you, who,
besides your rank as the first house in Guienne, indeed down from your
ancestors, possess every other sort of qualification, to establish, not merely
by your example, but by your authoritative testimony, that such is not always
the case: the more so that, though 'tis more natural with the Gascons to act
than talk, yet sometimes they employ the tongue more than the arm, and wit in
place of valour.  For my own part; sir, it is not in my way to judge of such
matters; but I have heard persons who are supposed to understand them, say that
these stanzas are not only worthy to be presented in the market-place, but,
independently of that, as regards beauty and wealth of invention, they are full
of marrow and matter as any compositions of the kind, which have appeared in
our language. Naturally each workman feels himself more strong in some special
part his art, and those are to be regarded as most fortunate, who lay hands on
the noblest, for all the parts essential to the construction of any whole are
not equally precious. We find elsewhere, perhaps, greater delicacy phrase,
greater softness and harmony of language; but imaginative grace, and in the
store of pointed wit, I do not think he has been surpassed; and we should take
the account that he made these things neither his occupation nor his study, and
that he scarcely took a pen in his hand more than once a year, as is shown by
the very slender quantity of his remains. For you see here, sir, green wood and
dry, without any sort of selection, all that has come into my possession;
insomuch that there are among the rest efforts even of his boyhood. In point of
fact, he seems to have written them merely to show that he was capable of
dealing with all subjects: for otherwise, thousands of times, in the course of
ordinary conversation, I have heard things drop from him infinitely more worthy
of being admired, infinitely more worthy of being preserved.
