For what concerns ourselves, who are not so scrupulous in this affair, and who
attribute the honour of the war to him who has the profit of it, and who after
Lysander say, "Where the lion's skin is too short, we must eke it out with a
bit from that of a fox"; the most usual occasions of surprise are derived from
this practice, and we hold that there are no moments wherein a chief ought to
be more circumspect, and to have his eye so much at watch, as those of parleys
and treaties of accommodation; and it is, therefore, become a general rule
amongst the martial men of these latter times, that a governor of a place never
ought, in a time of siege, to go out to parley. It was for this that in our
fathers' days the Seigneurs de Montmord and de l'Assigni, defending Mousson
against the Count of Nassau, were so highly censured. But yet, as to this, it
would be excusable in that governor who, going out, should, notwithstanding, do
it in such manner that the safety and advantage should be on his side; as Count
Guido di Rangone did at Reggio (if we are to believe Du Bellay, for
Guicciardini says it was he himself) when the Seigneur de l'Escut approached to
parley, who stepped so little away from his fort, that a disorder happening in
the interim of parley, not only Monsieur de l'Escut and his party who were
advanced with him, found themselves by much the weaker, insomuch that
Alessandro Trivulcio was there slain, but he himself follow the Count, and,
relying upon his honour, to secure himself from the danger of the shot within
the walls of the town.  Eumenes, being shut up in the city of Nora by
Antigonus, and by him importuned to come out to speak with him, as he sent him
word it was fit he should to a greater man than himself, and one who had now an
advantage over him, returned this noble answer. "Tell him," said he, "that I
shall never think any man greater than myself whilst I have my sword in my
hand," and would not consent to come out to him till first, according to his
own demand, Antigonus had delivered him his own nephew Ptolomeus in hostage.
And yet some have done very well in going out in person to parley, on the word
of the assailant: witness Henry de Vaux, a cavalier of Champagne, who being
besieged by the English in the Castle of Commercy, and Bartholomew de Brunes,
who commanded at the Leaguer, having so sapped the greatest part of the castle
without, that nothing remained but setting fire to the props to bury the
besieged under the ruins, he requested the said Henry to come out to speak with
him for his own good, which he did with three more in company; and, his ruin
being made apparent to him, he conceived himself singularly obliged to his
enemy, to whose discretion he and his garrison surrendered themselves; and fire
being presently applied to the mine, the props no sooner began to fail, but the
castle was immediately blown up from its foundations, no one stone being left
upon another.  I could, and do, with great facility, rely upon the faith of
another; but I should very unwillingly do it in such a case, as it should
thereby be judged that it was rather an effect of my despair and want of
courage than voluntarily and out of confidence and security in the faith of him
with whom I had to do.
