I saw, notwithstanding, lately at Mussidan, a place not far from my house, that
those who were driven out thence by our army, and others of their party, highly
complained of treachery, for that during a treaty of accommodation, and in the
very interim that their deputies were treating, they were surprised and cut to
pieces: a thing that, peradventure, in another age, might have had some colour
of foul play; but, as I have just said, the practice of arms in these days is
quite another thing, and there is now no confidence in an enemy excusable till
the treaty is finally sealed; and even then the conqueror has enough to do to
keep his word: so hazardous a thing it is to entrust the observation of the
faith a man has engaged to a town that surrenders upon easy and favourable
conditions, to the licence of a victorious army, and to give the soldier free
entrance into it in the heat of blood.  Lucius AEmilius Regillus, the Roman
praetor, having lost his time in attempting to take the city of Phocaea by
force, by reason of the singular valour wherewith the inhabitants defended
themselves, conditioned, at last, to receive them as friends to the people of
Rome, and to enter the town, as into a confederate city, without any manner of
hostility, of which he gave them all assurance; but having, for the greater
pomp, brought his whole army in with him, it was no more in his power, with all
the endeavour he could use, to restrain his people: so that, avarice and
revenge trampling under foot both his authority and all military discipline, he
there saw a considerable part of the city sacked and ruined before his face.
Cleomenes was wont to say, "that what mischief soever a man could do his enemy
in time of war was above justice, and nothing accountable to it in the sight of
gods and men." And so, having concluded a truce with those of Argos for seven
days, the third night after he fell upon them when they were all buried in
sleep, and put them to the sword, alleging that there had no nights been
mentioned in the truce; but the gods punished this subtle perfidy.  In a time
of parley also; and while the citizens were relying upon their safety warrant,
the city of Casilinum was taken by surprise, and that even in the age of the
justest captains and the most perfect Roman military discipline; for it is not
said that it is not lawful for us, in time and place, to make advantage of our
enemies' want of understanding, as well as their want of courage.  And,
doubtless, war has naturally many privileges that appear reasonable even to the
prejudice of reason. And therefore here the rule fails, "Neminem id agere ut ex
alte rius praedetur inscitia."—["No one should preys upon another's
folly."—Cicero, De Offic., iii. 17.]—But I am astonished at the great liberty
allowed by Xenophon in such cases, and that both by precept and by the example
of several exploits of his complete emperor; an author of very great authority,
I confess, in those affairs, as being in his own person both a great captain
and a philosopher of the first form of Socrates' disciples; and yet I cannot
consent to such a measure of licence as he dispenses in all things and places.
Monsieur d'Aubigny, besieging Capua, and after having directed a furious
battery against it, Signor Fabricio Colonna, governor of the town, having from
a bastion begun to parley, and his soldiers in the meantime being a little more
remiss in their guard, our people entered the place at unawares, and put them
all to the sword. And of later memory, at Yvoy, Signor Juliano Romero having
played that part of a novice to go out to parley with the Constable, at his
return found his place taken. But, that we might not scape scot-free, the
Marquess of Pescara having laid siege to Genoa, where Duke Ottaviano Fregosa
commanded under our protection, and the articles betwixt them being so far
advanced that it was looked upon as a done thing, and upon the point to be
concluded, the Spaniards in the meantime having slipped in, made use of this
treachery as an absolute victory. And since, at Ligny, in Barrois, where the
Count de Brienne commanded, the emperor having in his own person beleaguered
that place, and Bertheville, the said Count's lieutenant, going out to parley,
whilst he was capitulating the town was taken.
