Now, as we teach young ladies those sports and exercises which are most proper
to set out the grace and beauty of those parts wherein their chiefest ornament
and perfection lie, so it should be in these two advantages of eloquence, to
which the lawyers and preachers of our age seem principally to pretend. If I
were worthy to advise, the slow speaker, methinks, should be more proper for
the pulpit, and the other for the bar: and that because the employment of the
first does naturally allow him all the leisure he can desire to prepare
himself, and besides, his career is performed in an even and unintermitted
line, without stop or interruption; whereas the pleader's business and interest
compels him to enter the lists upon all occasions, and the unexpected
objections and replies of his adverse party jostle him out of his course, and
put him, upon the instant, to pump for new and extempore answers and defences.
Yet, at the interview betwixt Pope Clement and King Francis at Marseilles, it
happened, quite contrary, that Monsieur Poyet, a man bred up all his life at
the bar, and in the highest repute for eloquence, having the charge of making
the harangue to the Pope committed to him, and having so long meditated on it
beforehand, as, so they said, to have brought it ready made along with him from
Paris; the very day it was to have been pronounced, the Pope, fearing something
might be said that might give offence to the other princes' ambassadors who
were there attending on him, sent to acquaint the King with the argument which
he conceived most suiting to the time and place, but, by chance, quite another
thing to that Monsieur de Poyet had taken so much pains about: so that the fine
speech he had prepared was of no use, and he was upon the instant to contrive
another; which finding himself unable to do, Cardinal du Bellay was constrained
to perform that office. The pleader's part is, doubtless, much harder than that
of the preacher; and yet, in my opinion, we see more passable lawyers than
preachers, at all events in France. It should seem that the nature of wit is to
have its operation prompt and sudden, and that of judgment to have it more
deliberate and more slow. But he who remains totally silent, for want of
leisure to prepare himself to speak well, and he also whom leisure does noways
benefit to better speaking, are equally unhappy.  'Tis said of Severus Cassius
that he spoke best extempore, that he stood more obliged to fortune than to his
own diligence; that it was an advantage to him to be interrupted in speaking,
and that his adversaries were afraid to nettle him, lest his anger should
redouble his eloquence. I know, experimentally, the disposition of nature so
impatient of tedious and elaborate premeditation, that if it do not go frankly
and gaily to work, it can perform nothing to purpose. We say of some
compositions that they stink of oil and of the lamp, by reason of a certain
rough harshness that laborious handling imprints upon those where it has been
employed. But besides this, the solicitude of doing well, and a certain
striving and contending of a mind too far strained and overbent upon its
undertaking, breaks and hinders itself like water, that by force of its own
pressing violence and abundance, cannot find a ready issue through the neck of
a bottle or a narrow sluice. In this condition of nature, of which I am now
speaking, there is this also, that it would not be disordered and stimulated
with such passions as the fury of Cassius (for such a motion would be too
violent and rude); it would not be jostled, but solicited; it would be roused
and heated by unexpected, sudden, and accidental occasions. If it be left to
itself, it flags and languishes; agitation only gives it grace and vigour. I am
always worst in my own possession, and when wholly at my own disposition:
accident has more title to anything that comes from me than I; occasion,
company, and even the very rising and falling of my own voice, extract more
from my fancy than I can find, when I sound and employ it by myself. By which
means, the things I say are better than those I write, if either were to be
preferred, where neither is worth anything. This, also, befalls me, that I do
not find myself where I seek myself, and I light upon things more by chance
than by any inquisition of my own judgment. I perhaps sometimes hit upon
something when I write, that seems quaint and sprightly to me, though it will
appear dull and heavy to another.â€”But let us leave these fine compliments;
every one talks thus of himself according to his talent. But when I come to
speak, I am already so lost that I know not what I was about to say, and in
such cases a stranger often finds it out before me. If I should make erasure so
often as this inconvenience befalls me, I should make clean work; occasion
will, at some other time, lay it as visible to me as the light, and make me
wonder what I should stick at.
