Now, madam, having to draw my own picture to the life, I had omitted one
important feature, had I not therein represented the honour I have ever had for
you and your merits; which I have purposely chosen to say in the beginning of
this chapter, by reason that amongst the many other excellent qualities you are
mistress of, that of the tender love you have manifested to your children, is
seated in one of the highest places. Whoever knows at what age Monsieur
D'Estissac, your husband, left you a widow, the great and honourable matches
that have since been offered to you, as many as to any lady of your condition
in France, the constancy and steadiness wherewith, for so many years, you have
sustained so many sharp difficulties, the burden and conduct of affairs, which
have persecuted you in every corner of the kingdom, and are not yet weary of
tormenting you, and the happy direction you have given to all these, by your
sole prudence or good fortune, will easily conclude with me that we have not so
vivid an example as yours of maternal affection in our times. I praise God,
madam, that it has been so well employed; for the great hopes Monsieur
D'Estissac, your son, gives of himself, render sufficient assurance that when
he comes of age you will reap from him all the obedience and gratitude of a
very good man. But, forasmuch as by reason of his tender years, he has not been
capable of taking notice of those offices of extremest value he has in so great
number received from you, I will, if these papers shall one day happen to fall
into his hands, when I shall neither have mouth nor speech left to deliver it
to him, that he shall receive from me a true account of those things, which
shall be more effectually manifested to him by their own effects, by which he
will understand that there is not a gentleman in France who stands more
indebted to a mother's care; and that he cannot, in the future, give a better
nor more certain testimony of his own worth and virtue than by acknowledging
you for that excellent mother you are.  If there be any law truly natural, that
is to say, any instinct that is seen universally and perpetually imprinted in
both beasts and men (which is not without controversy), I can say, that in my
opinion, next to the care every animal has of its own preservation, and to
avoid that which may hurt him, the affection that the begetter bears to his
offspring holds the second place in this rank. And seeing that nature appears
to have recommended it to us, having regard to the extension and progression of
the successive pieces of this machine of hers, 'tis no wonder if, on the
contrary, that of children towards their parents is not so great. To which we
may add this other Aristotelian consideration, that he who confers a benefit on
any one, loves him better than he is beloved by him again: that he to whom is
owing, loves better than he who owes; and that every artificer is fonder of his
work, than, if that work had sense, it would be of him; by reason that it is
dear to us to be, and to be consists in movement and action; therefore every
one has in some sort a being in his work. He who confers a benefit exercises a
fine and honest action; he who receives it exercises the useful only. Now the
useful is much less lovable than the honest; the honest is stable and
permanent, supplying him who has done it with a continual gratification. The
useful loses itself, easily slides away, and the memory of it is neither so
fresh nor so pleasing. Those things are dearest to us that have cost us most,
and giving is more chargeable than receiving.
