This fault of not perceiving betimes and of not being sensible of the
feebleness and extreme alteration that age naturally brings both upon body and
mind, which, in my opinion, is equal, if indeed the soul has not more than
half, has lost the reputation of most of the great men in the world. I have
known in my time, and been intimately acquainted with persons of great
authority, whom one might easily discern marvellously lapsed from the
sufficiency I knew they were once endued with, by the reputation they had
acquired in their former years, whom I could heartily, for their own sakes,
have wished at home at their ease, discharged of their public or military
employments, which were now grown too heavy for their shoulders. I have
formerly been very familiar in a gentleman's house, a widower and very old,
though healthy and cheerful enough: this gentleman had several daughters to
marry and a son already of ripe age, which brought upon him many visitors, and
a great expense, neither of which well pleased him, not only out of
consideration of frugality, but yet more for having, by reason of his age,
entered into a course of life far differing from ours. I told him one day a
little boldly, as I used to do, that he would do better to give us younger folk
room, and to leave his principal house (for he had but that well placed and
furnished) to his son, and himself retire to an estate he had hard by, where
nobody would trouble his repose, seeing he could not otherwise avoid being
importuned by us, the condition of his children considered. He took my advice
afterwards, and found an advantage in so doing.  I do not mean that a man
should so instal them as not to reserve to himself a liberty to retract; I, who
am now arrived to the age wherein such things are fit to be done, would resign
to them the enjoyment of my house and goods, but with a power of revocation if
they should give me cause to alter my mind; I would leave to them the use, that
being no longer convenient for me; and, of the general authority and power over
all, would reserve as much asâ€”I thought good to myself; having always held that
it must needs be a great satisfaction to an aged father himself to put his
children into the way of governing his affairs, and to have power during his
own life to control their behaviour, supplying them with instruction and advice
from his own experience, and himself to transfer the ancient honour and order
of his house into the hands of those who are to succeed him, and by that means
to satisfy himself as to the hopes he may conceive of their future conduct. And
in order to this I would not avoid their company; I would observe them near at
hand, and partake, according to the condition of my age, of their feasts and
jollities. If I did not live absolutely amongst them, which I could not do
without annoying them and their friends, by reason of the morosity of my age
and the restlessness of my infirmities, and without violating also the rules
and order of living I should then have set down to myself, I would, at least,
live near them in some retired part of my house, not the best in show, but the
most commodious. Nor as I saw some years ago, a dean of St. Hilary of Poitiers
given up to such a solitude, that at the time I came into his chamber it had
been two and twenty years that he had not stepped one foot out of it, and yet
had all his motions free and easy, and was in good health, saving a cold that
fell upon his lungs; he would, hardly once in a week, suffer any one to come in
to see him; he always kept himself shut up in his chamber alone, except that a
servant brought him, once a day, something to eat, and did then but just come
in and go out again. His employment was to walk up and down, and read some
book, for he was a bit of a scholar; but, as to the rest, obstinately bent to
die in this retirement, as he soon after did. I would endeavour by pleasant
conversation to create in my children a warm and unfeigned friendship and
good-will towards me, which in well-descended natures is not hard to do; for if
they be furious brutes, of which this age of ours produces thousands, we are
then to hate and avoid them as such.
