I love historians, whether of the simple sort, or of the higher order. The
simple, who have nothing of their own to mix with it, and who only make it
their business to collect all that comes to their knowledge, and faithfully to
record all things, without choice or discrimination, leave to us the entire
judgment of discerning the truth. Such, for example, amongst others, is honest
Froissart, who has proceeded in his undertaking with so frank a plainness that,
having committed an error, he is not ashamed to confess and correct it in the
place where the finger has been laid, and who represents to us even the variety
of rumours that were then spread abroad, and the different reports that were
made to him; 'tis the naked and inform matter of history, and of which every
one may make his profit, according to his understanding. The more excellent
sort of historians have judgment to pick out what is most worthy to be known;
and, of two reports, to examine which is the most likely to be true: from the
condition of princes and their humours, they conclude their counsels, and
attribute to them words proper for the occasion; such have title to assume the
authority of regulating our belief to what they themselves believe; but
certainly, this privilege belongs to very few. For the middle sort of
historians, of which the most part are, they spoil all; they will chew our meat
for us; they take upon them to judge of, and consequently, to incline the
history to their own fancy; for if the judgment lean to one side, a man cannot
avoid wresting and writhing his narrative to that bias; they undertake to
select things worthy to be known, and yet often conceal from us such a word,
such a private action, as would much better instruct us; omit, as incredible,
such things as they do not understand, and peradventure some, because they
cannot express good French or Latin. Let them display their eloquence and
intelligence, and judge according to their own fancy: but let them, withal,
leave us something to judge of after them, and neither alter nor disguise, by
their abridgments and at their own choice, anything of the substance of the
matter, but deliver it to us pure and entire in all its dimensions.  For the
most part, and especially in these latter ages, persons are culled out for this
work from amongst the common people, upon the sole consideration of
well-speaking, as if we were to learn grammar from them; and the men so chosen
have fair reason, being hired for no other end and pretending to nothing but
babble, not to be very solicitous of any part but that, and so, with a fine
jingle of words, prepare us a pretty contexture of reports they pick up in the
streets. The only good histories are those that have been written themselves
who held command in the affairs whereof they write, or who participated in the
conduct of them, or, at least, who have had the conduct of others of the same
nature. Such are almost all the Greek and Roman histories: for, several
eye-witnesses having written of the same subject, in the time when grandeur and
learning commonly met in the same person, if there happen to be an error, it
must of necessity be a very slight one, and upon a very doubtful incident. What
can a man expect from a physician who writes of war, or from a mere scholar,
treating of the designs of princes? If we could take notice how scrupulous the
Romans were in this, there would need but this example: Asinius Pollio found in
the histories of Caesar himself something misreported, a mistake occasioned;
either by reason he could not have his eye in all parts of his army at once and
had given credit to some individual persons who had not delivered him a very
true account; or else, for not having had too perfect notice given him by his
lieutenants of what they had done in his absence.—[Suetonius, Life of Caesar,
c. 56.]—By which we may see, whether the inquisition after truth be not very
delicate, when a man cannot believe the report of a battle from the knowledge
of him who there commanded, nor from the soldiers who were engaged in it,
unless, after the method of a judicial inquiry, the witnesses be confronted and
objections considered upon the proof of the least detail of every incident. In
good earnest the knowledge we have of our own affairs, is much more obscure:
but that has been sufficiently handled by Bodin, and according to my own
sentiment —[In the work by jean Bodin, entitled "Methodus ad facilem
historiarum cognitionem." 1566.]—A little to aid the weakness of my memory (so
extreme that it has happened to me more than once, to take books again into my
hand as new and unseen, that I had carefully read over a few years before, and
scribbled with my notes) I have adopted a custom of late, to note at the end of
every book (that is, of those I never intend to read again) the time when I
made an end on't, and the judgment I had made of it, to the end that this
might, at least, represent to me the character and general idea I had conceived
of the author in reading it; and I will here transcribe some of those
annotations.
