The women drew together; they lowered their voices, and the discussion became
general, each giving his or her opinion. But the conversation was not in the
least coarse. The ladies, in particular, were adepts at delicate phrases and
charming subtleties of expression to describe the most improper things. A
stranger would have understood none of their allusions, so guarded was the
language they employed. But, seeing that the thin veneer of modesty with which
every woman of the world is furnished goes but a very little way below the
surface, they began rather to enjoy this unedifying episode, and at bottom were
hugely delighted â€”feeling themselves in their element, furthering the schemes
of lawless love with the gusto of a gourmand cook who prepares supper for
another.

Their gaiety returned of itself, so amusing at last did the whole business seem
to them. The count uttered several rather risky witticisms, but so tactfully
were they said that his audience could not help smiling. Loiseau in turn made
some considerably broader jokes, but no one took offence; and the thought
expressed with such brutal directness by his wife was uppermost in the minds of
all: "Since it's the girl's trade, why should she refuse this man more than
another?" Dainty Madame Carre-Lamadon seemed to think even that in Boule de
Suif's place she would be less inclined to refuse him than another.

The blockade was as carefully arranged as if they were investing a fortress.
Each agreed on the role which he or she was to play, the arguments to be used,
the maneuvers to be executed. They decided on the plan of campaign, the
stratagems they were to employ, and the surprise attacks which were to reduce
this human citadel and force it to receive the enemy within its walls.

But Cornudet remained apart from the rest, taking no share in the plot.

So absorbed was the attention of all that Boule de Suif's entrance was almost
unnoticed. But the count whispered a gentle "Hush!" which made the others look
up. She was there. They suddenly stopped talking, and a vague embarrassment
prevented them for a few moments from addressing her. But the countess, more
practiced than the others in the wiles of the drawing-room, asked her:

"Was the baptism interesting?"

The girl, still under the stress of emotion, told what she had seen and heard,
described the faces, the attitudes of those present, and even the appearance of
the church. She concluded with the words:

"It does one good to pray sometimes."

Until lunch time the ladies contented themselves with being pleasant to her, so
as to increase her confidence and make her amenable to their advice.

As soon as they took their seats at table the attack began. First they opened a
vague conversation on the subject of self-sacrifice. Ancient examples were
quoted: Judith and Holofernes; then, irrationally enough, Lucrece and Sextus;
Cleopatra and the hostile generals whom she reduced to abject slavery by a
surrender of her charms. Next was recounted an extraordinary story, born of the
imagination of these ignorant millionaires, which told how the matrons of Rome
seduced Hannibal, his lieutenants, and all his mercenaries at Capua. They held
up to admiration all those women who from time to time have arrested the
victorious progress of conquerors, made of their bodies a field of battle, a
means of ruling, a weapon; who have vanquished by their heroic caresses hideous
or detested beings, and sacrificed their chastity to vengeance and devotion.
