He thought the thing over for about six months; then one morning he walked
across to the shore. The demon was eating his soup in front of his door when he
saw the saint. He immediately rushed toward him, kissed the hem of his sleeve,
invited him in and offered him refreshments.

Saint Michael drank a bowl of milk and then began: "I have come here to propose
to you a good bargain."

The devil, candid and trustful, answered: "That will suit me."

"Here it is. Give me all your lands."

Satan, growing alarmed, wished to speak "Butâ€”"

She saint continued: "Listen first. Give me all your lands. I will take care of
all the work, the ploughing, the sowing, the fertilizing, everything, and we
will share the crops equally. How does that suit you?"

The devil, who was naturally lazy, accepted. He only demanded in addition a few
of those delicious gray mullet which are caught around the solitary mount.
Saint Michael promised the fish.

They grasped hands and spat on the ground to show that it was a bargain, and
the saint continued: "See here, so that you will have nothing to complain of,
choose that part of the crops which you prefer: the part that grows above
ground or the part that stays in the ground." Satan cried out: "I will take all
that will be above ground."

"It's a bargain!" said the saint. And he went away.

Six months later, all over the immense domain of the devil, one could see
nothing but carrots, turnips, onions, salsify, all the plants whose juicy roots
are good and savory and whose useless leaves are good for nothing but for
feeding animals.

Satan wished to break the contract, calling Saint Michael a swindler.

But the saint, who had developed quite a taste for agriculture, went back to
see the devil and said:

"Really, I hadn't thought of that at all; it was just an accident, no fault of
mine. And to make things fair with you, this year I'll let you take everything
that is under the ground."

"Very well," answered Satan.

The following spring all the evil spirit's lands were covered with golden
wheat, oats as big as beans, flax, magnificent colza, red clover, peas,
cabbage, artichokes, everything that develops into grains or fruit in the
sunlight.

Once more Satan received nothing, and this time he completely lost his temper.
He took back his fields and remained deaf to all the fresh propositions of his
neighbor.

A whole year rolled by. From the top of his lonely manor Saint Michael looked
at the distant and fertile lands and watched the devil direct the work, take in
his crops and thresh the wheat. And he grew angry, exasperated at his
powerlessness.
