Madame Tellier had a brother, who was a carpenter in their native place,
Virville, in the Department of Eure. When she still kept the inn at Yvetot, she
had stood godmother to that brother's daughter, who had received the name of
Constanceâ€”Constance Rivet; she herself being a Rivet on her father's side. The
carpenter, who knew that his sister was in a good position, did not lose sight
of her, although they did not meet often, for they were both kept at home by
their occupations, and lived a long way from each other. But as the girl was
twelve years old, and going to be confirmed, he seized that opportunity to
write to his sister, asking her to come and be present at the ceremony. Their
old parents were dead, and as she could not well refuse her goddaughter, she
accepted the invitation. Her brother, whose name was Joseph, hoped that by dint
of showing his sister attention, she might be induced to make her will in the
girl's favor, as she had no children of her own.

His sister's occupation did not trouble his scruples in the least, and,
besides, nobody knew anything about it at Virville. When they spoke of her,
they only said: "Madame Tellier is living at Fecamp," which might mean that she
was living on her own private income. It was quite twenty leagues from Fecamp
to Virville, and for a peasant, twenty leagues on land is as long a journey as
crossing the ocean would be to city people. The people at Virville had never
been further than Rouen, and nothing attracted the people from Fecamp to a
village of five hundred houses in the middle of a plain, and situated in
another department; at any rate, nothing was known about her business.

But the Confirmation was coming on, and Madame Tellier was in great
embarrassment. She had no substitute, and did not at all care to leave her
house, even for a day; for all the rivalries between the girls upstairs and
those downstairs would infallibly break out. No doubt Frederic would get drunk,
and when he was in that state, he would knock anybody down for a mere word. At
last, however, she made up her mind to take them all with her, with the
exception of the man, to whom she gave a holiday until the next day but one.

When she asked her brother, he made no objection, but undertook to put them all
up for a night, and so on Saturday morning the eight-o'clock express carried
off Madame Tellier and her companions in a second-class carriage. As far as
Beuzeville they were alone, and chattered like magpies, but at that station a
couple got in. The man, an old peasant, dressed in a blue blouse with a
turned-down collar, wide sleeves tight at the wrist, ornamented with white
embroidery, wearing an old high hat with long nap, held an enormous green
umbrella in one hand, and a large basket in the other, from which the heads of
three frightened ducks protruded. The woman, who sat up stiffly in her rustic
finery, had a face like a fowl, with a nose that was as pointed as a bill. She
sat down opposite her husband and did not stir, as she was startled at finding
herself in such smart company.

There was certainly an array of striking colors in the carriage. Madame Tellier
was dressed in blue silk from head to foot, and had on a dazzling red imitation
French cashmere shawl. Fernande was puffing in a Scotch plaid dress, of which
her companions had laced the bodice as tight as they could, forcing up her full
bust, that was continually heaving up and down. Raphaele, with a bonnet covered
with feathers, so that it looked like a bird's nest, had on a lilac dress with
gold spots on it, and there was something Oriental about it that suited her
Jewish face. Rosa had on a pink skirt with largo flounces, and looked like a
very fat child, an obese dwarf; while the two Pumps looked as if they had cut
their dresses out of old flowered curtains dating from the Restoration.
