A child's shrill voice took up the reply, and from time to time a priest
sitting in a stall and wearing a biretta got up, muttered something and sat
down again, while the three singers continued, their eyes fixed on the big book
of plain chant lying open before them on the outstretched wings of a wooden
eagle.

Then silence ensued and the service went on. Toward the close Rosa, with her
head in both hands, suddenly thought of her mother, her village church and her
first communion. She almost fancied that that day had returned, when she was so
small anti was almost hidden in her white dress, and she began to cry.

First of all she wept silently, and the tears dropped slowly from her eyes, but
her emotion in creased with her recollections, and she began to sob. She took
out her pocket handkerchief, wiped her eyes and held it to her mouth, so as not
to scream, but it was in vain. A sort of rattle escaped her throat, and she was
answered by two other profound, heartbreaking sobs, for her two neighbors,
Louise and Flora, who were kneeling near her, overcome by similar
recollections, were sobbing by her side, amid a flood of tears; and as tears
are contagious, Madame Tellier soon in turn found that her eyes were wet, and
on turning to her sister-in-law, she saw that all the occupants of her seat
were also crying.

Soon, throughout the church, here and there, a wife, a mother, a sister, seized
by the strange sympathy of poignant emotion, and affected at the sight of those
handsome ladies on their knees, shaken with sobs was moistening her cambric
pocket handkerchief and pressing her beating heart with her left hand.

Just as the sparks from an engine will set fire to dry grass, so the tears of
Rosa and of her companions infected the whole congregation in a moment. Men,
women, old men and lads in new smocks were soon all sobbing, and something
superhuman seemed to be hovering over their headsâ€”a spirit, the powerful breath
of an invisible and all powerful Being.

Suddenly a species of madness seemed to pervade the church, the noise of a
crowd in a state of frenzy, a tempest of sobs and stifled cries. It came like
gusts of wind which blow the trees in a forest, and the priest, paralyzed by
emotion, stammered out incoherent prayers, without finding words, ardent
prayers of the soul soaring to heaven.

The people behind him gradually grew calmer. The cantors, in all the dignity of
their white surplices, went on in somewhat uncertain voices, and the reed stop
itself seemed hoarse, as if the instrument had been weeping; the priest,
however, raised his hand to command silence and went and stood on the chancel
steps, when everybody was silent at once.

After a few remarks on what had just taken place, and which he attributed to a
miracle, he continued, turning to the seats where the carpenter's guests were
sitting; "I especially thank you, my dear sisters, who have come from such a
distance, and whose presence among us, whose evident faith and ardent piety
have set such a salutary example to all. You have edified my parish; your
emotion has warmed all hearts; without you, this great day would not, perhaps,
have had this really divine character. It is sufficient, at times, that there
should be one chosen lamb, for the Lord to descend on His flock."

His voice failed him again, from emotion, and he said no more, but concluded
the service.
