They now left the church as quickly as possible; the children themselves were
restless and tired with such a prolonged tension of the mind. The parents left
the church by degrees to see about dinner.

There was a crowd outside, a noisy crowd, a babel of loud voices, where the
shrill Norman accent was discernible. The villagers formed two ranks, and when
the children appeared, each family took possession of their own.

The whole houseful of women caught hold of Constance, surrounded her and kissed
her, and Rosa was especially demonstrative. At last she took hold of one hand,
while Madame Tellier took the other, and Raphaele and Fernande held up her long
muslin skirt, so that it might not drag in the dust; Louise and Flora brought
up the rear with Madame Rivet; and the child, who was very silent and
thoughtful, set off for home in the midst of this guard of honor.

Dinner was served in the workshop on long boards supported by trestles, and
through the open door they could see all the enjoyment that was going on in the
village. Everywhere they were feasting, and through every window were to be
seen tables surrounded by people in their Sunday best, and a cheerful noise was
heard in every house, while the men sat in their shirt-sleeves, drinking glass
after glass of cider.

In the carpenter's house the gaiety maintained somewhat of an air of reserve,
the consequence of the emotion of the girls in the morning, and Rivet was the
only one who was in a jolly mood, and he was drinking to excess. Madame Tellier
looked at the clock every moment, for, in order not to lose two days running,
they must take the 3:55 train, which would bring them to Fecamp by dark.

The carpenter tried very hard to distract her attention, so as to keep his
guests until the next day, but he did not succeed, for she never joked when
there was business on hand, and as soon as they had had their coffee she
ordered her girls to make haste and get ready, and then, turning to her
brother, she said:

"You must put in the horse immediately," and she herself went to finish her
last preparations.

When she came down again, her sister-in-law was waiting to speak to her about
the child, and a long conversation took place, in which, however, nothing was
settled. The carpenter's wife was artful and pretended to be very much
affected, and Madame Tellier, who was holding the girl on her knee, would not
pledge herself to anything definite, but merely gave vague promisesâ€”she would
not forget her, there was plenty of time, and besides, they would meet again.

But the conveyance did not come to the door and the women did not come
downstairs. Upstairs they even heard loud laughter, romping, little screams,
and much clapping of hands, and so, while the carpenter's wife went to the
stable to see whether the cart was ready, madame went upstairs.

Rivet, who was very drunk, was plaguing Rosa, who was half choking with
laughter. Louise and Flora were holding him by the arms and trying to calm him,
as they were shocked at his levity after that morning's ceremony; but Raphaele
and Fernande were urging him on, writhing and holding their sides with
laughter, and they uttered shrill cries at every rebuff the drunken fellow
received.

The man was furious, his face was red, and he was trying to shake off the two
women who were clinging to him, while he was pulling Rosa's skirt with all his
might and stammering incoherently.
