Afterwards, that he might be all his lifetime a good rider, they made to him a
fair great horse of wood, which he did make leap, curvet, jerk out behind, and
skip forward, all at a time: to pace, trot, rack, gallop, amble, to play the
hobby, the hackney-gelding: go the gait of the camel, and of the wild ass. He
made him also change his colour of hair, as the monks of Coultibo (according to
the variety of their holidays) use to do their clothes, from bay brown, to
sorrel, dapple-grey, mouse-dun, deer-colour, roan, cow-colour, gingioline,
skewed colour, piebald, and the colour of the savage elk.  Himself of a huge
big post made a hunting nag, and another for daily service of the beam of a
vinepress: and of a great oak made up a mule, with a footcloth, for his
chamber. Besides this, he had ten or twelve spare horses, and seven horses for
post; and all these were lodged in his own chamber, close by his bedside. One
day the Lord of Breadinbag (Painensac.) came to visit his father in great
bravery, and with a gallant train: and, at the same time, to see him came
likewise the Duke of Freemeal (Francrepas.) and the Earl of Wetgullet
(Mouillevent.). The house truly for so many guests at once was somewhat narrow,
but especially the stables; whereupon the steward and harbinger of the said
Lord Breadinbag, to know if there were any other empty stable in the house,
came to Gargantua, a little young lad, and secretly asked him where the stables
of the great horses were, thinking that children would be ready to tell all.
Then he led them up along the stairs of the castle, passing by the second hall
unto a broad great gallery, by which they entered into a large tower, and as
they were going up at another pair of stairs, said the harbinger to the
steward, This child deceives us, for the stables are never on the top of the
house. You may be mistaken, said the steward, for I know some places at Lyons,
at the Basmette, at Chaisnon, and elsewhere, which have their stables at the
very tops of the houses: so it may be that behind the house there is a way to
come to this ascent. But I will question with him further. Then said he to
Gargantua, My pretty little boy, whither do you lead us? To the stable, said
he, of my great horses. We are almost come to it; we have but these stairs to
go up at. Then leading them alongst another great hall, he brought them into
his chamber, and, opening the door, said unto them, This is the stable you ask
for; this is my jennet; this is my gelding; this is my courser, and this is my
hackney, and laid on them with a great lever. I will bestow upon you, said he,
this Friesland horse; I had him from Frankfort, yet will I give him you; for he
is a pretty little nag, and will go very well, with a tessel of goshawks, half
a dozen of spaniels, and a brace of greyhounds: thus are you king of the hares
and partridges for all this winter. By St. John, said they, now we are paid, he
hath gleeked us to some purpose, bobbed we are now for ever. I deny it, said
he,â€”he was not here above three days. Judge you now, whether they had most
cause, either to hide their heads for shame, or to laugh at the jest. As they
were going down again thus amazed, he asked them, Will you have a whimwham
(Aubeliere.)? What is that, said they? It is, said he, five turds to make you a
muzzle. To-day, said the steward, though we happen to be roasted, we shall not
be burnt, for we are pretty well quipped and larded, in my opinion. O my jolly
dapper boy, thou hast given us a gudgeon; I hope to see thee Pope before I die.
I think so, said he, myself; and then shall you be a puppy, and this gentle
popinjay a perfect papelard, that is, dissembler. Well, well, said the
harbinger. But, said Gargantua, guess how many stitches there are in my
mother's smock. Sixteen, quoth the harbinger. You do not speak gospel, said
Gargantua, for there is cent before, and cent behind, and you did not reckon
them ill, considering the two under holes. When? said the harbinger. Even then,
said Gargantua, when they made a shovel of your nose to take up a quarter of
dirt, and of your throat a funnel, wherewith to put it into another vessel,
because the bottom of the old one was out. Cocksbod, said the steward, we have
met with a prater. Farewell, master tattler, God keep you, so goodly are the
words which you come out with, and so fresh in your mouth, that it had need to
be salted.
