At the last his father perceived that indeed he studied hard, and that,
although he spent all his time in it, he did nevertheless profit nothing, but
which is worse, grew thereby foolish, simple, doted, and blockish, whereof
making a heavy regret to Don Philip of Marays, Viceroy or Depute King of
Papeligosse, he found that it were better for him to learn nothing at all, than
to be taught such-like books, under such schoolmasters; because their knowledge
was nothing but brutishness, and their wisdom but blunt foppish toys, serving
only to bastardize good and noble spirits, and to corrupt all the flower of
youth. That it is so, take, said he, any young boy of this time who hath only
studied two years,â€”if he have not a better judgment, a better discourse, and
that expressed in better terms than your son, with a completer carriage and
civility to all manner of persons, account me for ever hereafter a very clounch
and bacon-slicer of Brene. This pleased Grangousier very well, and he commanded
that it should be done. At night at supper, the said Des Marays brought in a
young page of his, of Ville-gouges, called Eudemon, so neat, so trim, so
handsome in his apparel, so spruce, with his hair in so good order, and so
sweet and comely in his behaviour, that he had the resemblance of a little
angel more than of a human creature. Then he said to Grangousier, Do you see
this young boy? He is not as yet full twelve years old. Let us try, if it
please you, what difference there is betwixt the knowledge of the doting
Mateologians of old time and the young lads that are now. The trial pleased
Grangousier, and he commanded the page to begin. Then Eudemon, asking leave of
the vice-king his master so to do, with his cap in his hand, a clear and open
countenance, beautiful and ruddy lips, his eyes steady, and his looks fixed
upon Gargantua with a youthful modesty, standing up straight on his feet, began
very gracefully to commend him; first, for his virtue and good manners;
secondly, for his knowledge, thirdly, for his nobility; fourthly, for his
bodily accomplishments; and, in the fifth place, most sweetly exhorted him to
reverence his father with all due observancy, who was so careful to have him
well brought up. In the end he prayed him, that he would vouchsafe to admit of
him amongst the least of his servants; for other favour at that time desired he
none of heaven, but that he might do him some grateful and acceptable service.
All this was by him delivered with such proper gestures, such distinct
pronunciation, so pleasant a delivery, in such exquisite fine terms, and so
good Latin, that he seemed rather a Gracchus, a Cicero, an Aemilius of the time
past, than a youth of this age. But all the countenance that Gargantua kept
was, that he fell to crying like a cow, and cast down his face, hiding it with
his cap, nor could they possibly draw one word from him, no more than a fart
from a dead ass. Whereat his father was so grievously vexed that he would have
killed Master Jobelin, but the said Des Marays withheld him from it by fair
persuasions, so that at length he pacified his wrath. Then Grangousier
commanded he should be paid his wages, that they should whittle him up soundly,
like a sophister, with good drink, and then give him leave to go to all the
devils in hell. At least, said he, today shall it not cost his host much if by
chance he should die as drunk as a Switzer. Master Jobelin being gone out of
the house, Grangousier consulted with the Viceroy what schoolmaster they should
choose for him, and it was betwixt them resolved that Ponocrates, the tutor of
Eudemon, should have the charge, and that they should go altogether to Paris,
to know what was the study of the young men of France at that time.
