Some few days after that they had refreshed themselves, he went to see the
city, and was beheld of everybody there with great admiration; for the people
of Paris are so sottish, so badot, so foolish and fond by nature, that a
juggler, a carrier of indulgences, a sumpter-horse, or mule with cymbals or
tinkling bells, a blind fiddler in the middle of a cross lane, shall draw a
greater confluence of people together than an evangelical preacher. And they
pressed so hard upon him that he was constrained to rest himself upon the
towers of Our Lady's Church. At which place, seeing so many about him, he said
with a loud voice, I believe that these buzzards will have me to pay them here
my welcome hither, and my Proficiat. It is but good reason. I will now give
them their wine, but it shall be only in sport. Then smiling, he untied his
fair braguette, and drawing out his mentul into the open air, he so bitterly
all-to-bepissed them, that he drowned two hundred and sixty thousand, four
hundred and eighteen, besides the women and little children. Some,
nevertheless, of the company escaped this piss-flood by mere speed of foot,
who, when they were at the higher end of the university, sweating, coughing,
spitting, and out of breath, they began to swear and curse, some in good hot
earnest, and others in jest. Carimari, carimara: golynoly, golynolo. By my
sweet Sanctess, we are washed in sport, a sport truly to laugh at;—in French,
Par ris, for which that city hath been ever since called Paris; whose name
formerly was Leucotia, as Strabo testifieth, lib. quarto, from the Greek word
leukotes, whiteness,—because of the white thighs of the ladies of that place.
And forasmuch as, at this imposition of a new name, all the people that were
there swore everyone by the Sancts of his parish, the Parisians, which are
patched up of all nations and all pieces of countries, are by nature both good
jurors and good jurists, and somewhat overweening; whereupon Joanninus de
Barrauco, libro de copiositate reverentiarum, thinks that they are called
Parisians from the Greek word parresia, which signifies boldness and liberty in
speech. This done, he considered the great bells, which were in the said
towers, and made them sound very harmoniously. Which whilst he was doing, it
came into his mind that they would serve very well for tingling tantans and
ringing campanels to hang about his mare's neck when she should be sent back to
his father, as he intended to do, loaded with Brie cheese and fresh herring.
And indeed he forthwith carried them to his lodging. In the meanwhile there
came a master beggar of the friars of St. Anthony to demand in his canting way
the usual benevolence of some hoggish stuff, who, that he might be heard afar
off, and to make the bacon he was in quest of shake in the very chimneys, made
account to filch them away privily. Nevertheless, he left them behind very
honestly, not for that they were too hot, but that they were somewhat too heavy
for his carriage. This was not he of Bourg, for he was too good a friend of
mine. All the city was risen up in sedition, they being, as you know, upon any
slight occasion, so ready to uproars and insurrections, that foreign nations
wonder at the patience of the kings of France, who do not by good justice
restrain them from such tumultuous courses, seeing the manifold inconveniences
which thence arise from day to day. Would to God I knew the shop wherein are
forged these divisions and factious combinations, that I might bring them to
light in the confraternities of my parish! Believe for a truth, that the place
wherein the people gathered together, were thus sulphured, hopurymated, moiled,
and bepissed, was called Nesle, where then was, but now is no more, the oracle
of Leucotia. There was the case proposed, and the inconvenience showed of the
transporting of the bells. After they had well ergoted pro and con, they
concluded in baralipton, that they should send the oldest and most sufficient
of the faculty unto Gargantua, to signify unto him the great and horrible
prejudice they sustain by the want of those bells. And notwithstanding the good
reasons given in by some of the university why this charge was fitter for an
orator than a sophister, there was chosen for this purpose our Master Janotus
de Bragmardo.
