The sophister had no sooner ended, but Ponocrates and Eudemon burst out in a
laughing so heartily, that they had almost split with it, and given up the
ghost, in rendering their souls to God: even just as Crassus did, seeing a
lubberly ass eat thistles; and as Philemon, who, for seeing an ass eat those
figs which were provided for his own dinner, died with force of laughing.
Together with them Master Janotus fell a-laughing too as fast as he could, in
which mood of laughing they continued so long, that their eyes did water by the
vehement concussion of the substance of the brain, by which these lachrymal
humidities, being pressed out, glided through the optic nerves, and so to the
full represented Democritus Heraclitizing and Heraclitus Democritizing.  When
they had done laughing, Gargantua consulted with the prime of his retinue what
should be done. There Ponocrates was of opinion that they should make this fair
orator drink again; and seeing he had showed them more pastime, and made them
laugh more than a natural soul could have done, that they should give him ten
baskets full of sausages, mentioned in his pleasant speech, with a pair of
hose, three hundred great billets of logwood, five-and-twenty hogsheads of
wine, a good large down-bed, and a deep capacious dish, which he said were
necessary for his old age. All this was done as they did appoint: only
Gargantua, doubting that they could not quickly find out breeches fit for his
wearing, because he knew not what fashion would best become the said orator,
whether the martingale fashion of breeches, wherein is a spunghole with a
drawbridge for the more easy caguing: or the fashion of the mariners, for the
greater solace and comfort of his kidneys: or that of the Switzers, which keeps
warm the bedondaine or belly-tabret: or round breeches with straight cannions,
having in the seat a piece like a cod's tail, for fear of over-heating his
reins:â€”all which considered, he caused to be given him seven ells of white
cloth for the linings. The wood was carried by the porters, the masters of arts
carried the sausages and the dishes, and Master Janotus himself would carry the
cloth. One of the said masters, called Jousse Bandouille, showed him that it
was not seemly nor decent for one of his condition to do so, and that therefore
he should deliver it to one of them. Ha, said Janotus, baudet, baudet, or
blockhead, blockhead, thou dost not conclude in modo et figura. For lo, to this
end serve the suppositions and parva logicalia. Pannus, pro quo supponit?
Confuse, said Bandouille, et distributive. I do not ask thee, said Janotus,
blockhead, quomodo supponit, but pro quo? It is, blockhead, pro tibiis meis,
and therefore I will carry it, Egomet, sicut suppositum portat appositum. So
did he carry it away very close and covertly, as Patelin the buffoon did his
cloth. The best was, that when this cougher, in a full act or assembly held at
the Mathurins, had with great confidence required his breeches and sausages,
and that they were flatly denied him, because he had them of Gargantua,
according to the informations thereupon made, he showed them that this was
gratis, and out of his liberality, by which they were not in any sort quit of
their promises. Notwithstanding this, it was answered him that he should be
content with reason, without expectation of any other bribe there. Reason? said
Janotus. We use none of it here. Unlucky traitors, you are not worth the
hanging. The earth beareth not more arrant villains than you are. I know it
well enough; halt not before the lame. I have practised wickedness with you. By
God's rattle, I will inform the king of the enormous abuses that are forged
here and carried underhand by you, and let me be a leper, if he do not burn you
alive like sodomites, traitors, heretics and seducers, enemies to God and
virtue.  Upon these words they framed articles against him: he on the other
side warned them to appear. In sum, the process was retained by the court, and
is there as yet. Hereupon the magisters made a vow never to decrott themselves
in rubbing off the dirt of either their shoes or clothes: Master Janotus with
his adherents vowed never to blow or snuff their noses, until judgment were
given by a definitive sentence.
