If it happened that the weather were anything cloudy, foul, and rainy, all the
forenoon was employed, as before specified, according to custom, with this
difference only, that they had a good clear fire lighted to correct the
distempers of the air. But after dinner, instead of their wonted exercitations,
they did abide within, and, by way of apotherapy (that is, a making the body
healthful by exercise), did recreate themselves in bottling up of hay, in
cleaving and sawing of wood, and in threshing sheaves of corn at the barn. Then
they studied the art of painting or carving; or brought into use the antique
play of tables, as Leonicus hath written of it, and as our good friend Lascaris
playeth at it. In playing they examined the passages of ancient authors wherein
the said play is mentioned or any metaphor drawn from it. They went likewise to
see the drawing of metals, or the casting of great ordnance; how the lapidaries
did work; as also the goldsmiths and cutters of precious stones. Nor did they
omit to visit the alchemists, money-coiners, upholsterers, weavers,
velvet-workers, watchmakers, looking-glass framers, printers, organists, and
other such kind of artificers, and, everywhere giving them somewhat to drink,
did learn and consider the industry and invention of the trades. They went also
to hear the public lectures, the solemn commencements, the repetitions, the
acclamations, the pleadings of the gentle lawyers, and sermons of evangelical
preachers. He went through the halls and places appointed for fencing, and
there played against the masters themselves at all weapons, and showed them by
experience that he knew as much in it as, yea, more than, they. And, instead of
herborizing, they visited the shops of druggists, herbalists, and apothecaries,
and diligently considered the fruits, roots, leaves, gums, seeds, the grease
and ointments of some foreign parts, as also how they did adulterate them. He
went to see the jugglers, tumblers, mountebanks, and quacksalvers, and
considered their cunning, their shifts, their somersaults and smooth tongue,
especially of those of Chauny in Picardy, who are naturally great praters, and
brave givers of fibs, in matter of green apes.  At their return they did eat
more soberly at supper than at other times, and meats more desiccative and
extenuating; to the end that the intemperate moisture of the air, communicated
to the body by a necessary confinitive, might by this means be corrected, and
that they might not receive any prejudice for want of their ordinary bodily
exercise. Thus was Gargantua governed, and kept on in this course of education,
from day to day profiting, as you may understand such a young man of his age
may, of a pregnant judgment, with good discipline well continued. Which,
although at the beginning it seemed difficult, became a little after so sweet,
so easy, and so delightful, that it seemed rather the recreation of a king than
the study of a scholar. Nevertheless Ponocrates, to divert him from this
vehement intension of the spirits, thought fit, once in a month, upon some fair
and clear day, to go out of the city betimes in the morning, either towards
Gentilly, or Boulogne, or to Montrouge, or Charanton bridge, or to Vanves, or
St. Clou, and there spend all the day long in making the greatest cheer that
could be devised, sporting, making merry, drinking healths, playing, singing,
dancing, tumbling in some fair meadow, unnestling of sparrows, taking of
quails, and fishing for frogs and crabs. But although that day was passed
without books or lecture, yet was it not spent without profit; for in the said
meadows they usually repeated certain pleasant verses of Virgil's agriculture,
of Hesiod and of Politian's husbandry, would set a-broach some witty Latin
epigrams, then immediately turned them into roundelays and songs for dancing in
the French language. In their feasting they would sometimes separate the water
from the wine that was therewith mixed, as Cato teacheth, De re rustica, and
Pliny with an ivy cup would wash the wine in a basinful of water, then take it
out again with a funnel as pure as ever. They made the water go from one glass
to another, and contrived a thousand little automatory engines, that is to say,
moving of themselves.
