At that time, which was the season of vintage, in the beginning of harvest,
when the country shepherds were set to keep the vines, and hinder the starlings
from eating up the grapes, as some cake-bakers of Lerne happened to pass along
in the broad highway, driving into the city ten or twelve horses loaded with
cakes, the said shepherds courteously entreated them to give them some for
their money, as the price then ruled in the market. For here it is to be
remarked, that it is a celestial food to eat for breakfast hot fresh cakes with
grapes, especially the frail clusters, the great red grapes, the muscadine, the
verjuice grape, and the laskard, for those that are costive in their belly,
because it will make them gush out, and squirt the length of a hunter's staff,
like the very tap of a barrel; and oftentimes, thinking to let a squib, they
did all-to-besquatter and conskite themselves, whereupon they are commonly
called the vintage thinkers. The bun-sellers or cake-makers were in nothing
inclinable to their request; but, which was worse, did injure them most
outrageously, calling them prattling gabblers, lickorous gluttons, freckled
bittors, mangy rascals, shite-a-bed scoundrels, drunken roysters, sly knaves,
drowsy loiterers, slapsauce fellows, slabberdegullion druggels, lubberly louts,
cozening foxes, ruffian rogues, paltry customers, sycophant-varlets, drawlatch
hoydens, flouting milksops, jeering companions, staring clowns, forlorn snakes,
ninny lobcocks, scurvy sneaksbies, fondling fops, base loons, saucy coxcombs,
idle lusks, scoffing braggarts, noddy meacocks, blockish grutnols,
doddipol-joltheads, jobbernol goosecaps, foolish loggerheads, flutch
calf-lollies, grouthead gnat-snappers, lob-dotterels, gaping changelings,
codshead loobies, woodcock slangams, ninny-hammer flycatchers, noddypeak
simpletons, turdy gut, shitten shepherds, and other suchlike defamatory
epithets; saying further, that it was not for them to eat of these dainty
cakes, but might very well content themselves with the coarse unranged bread,
or to eat of the great brown household loaf. To which provoking words, one
amongst them, called Forgier, an honest fellow of his person and a notable
springal, made answer very calmly thus: How long is it since you have got
horns, that you are become so proud? Indeed formerly you were wont to give us
some freely, and will you not now let us have any for our money? This is not
the part of good neighbours, neither do we serve you thus when you come hither
to buy our good corn, whereof you make your cakes and buns. Besides that, we
would have given you to the bargain some of our grapes, but, by his zounds, you
may chance to repent it, and possibly have need of us at another time, when we
shall use you after the like manner, and therefore remember it. Then Marquet, a
prime man in the confraternity of the cake-bakers, said unto him, Yea, sir,
thou art pretty well crest-risen this morning, thou didst eat yesternight too
much millet and bolymong. Come hither, sirrah, come hither, I will give thee
some cakes. Whereupon Forgier, dreading no harm, in all simplicity went towards
him, and drew a sixpence out of his leather satchel, thinking that Marquet
would have sold him some of his cakes. But, instead of cakes, he gave him with
his whip such a rude lash overthwart the legs, that the marks of the whipcord
knots were apparent in them, then would have fled away; but Forgier cried out
as loud as he could, O, murder, murder, help, help, help! and in the meantime
threw a great cudgel after him, which he carried under his arm, wherewith he
hit him in the coronal joint of his head, upon the crotaphic artery of the
right side thereof, so forcibly, that Marquet fell down from his mare more like
a dead than living man. Meanwhile the farmers and country swains, that were
watching their walnuts near to that place, came running with their great poles
and long staves, and laid such load on these cake-bakers, as if they had been
to thresh upon green rye. The other shepherds and shepherdesses, hearing the
lamentable shout of Forgier, came with their slings and slackies following
them, and throwing great stones at them, as thick as if it had been hail. At
last they overtook them, and took from them about four or five dozen of their
cakes. Nevertheless they paid for them the ordinary price, and gave them over
and above one hundred eggs and three baskets full of mulberries. Then did the
cake-bakers help to get up to his mare Marquet, who was most shrewdly wounded,
and forthwith returned to Lerne, changing the resolution they had to go to
Pareille, threatening very sharp and boisterously the cowherds, shepherds, and
farmers of Seville and Sinays. This done, the shepherds and shepherdesses made
merry with these cakes and fine grapes, and sported themselves together at the
sound of the pretty small pipe, scoffing and laughing at those vainglorious
cake-bakers, who had that day met with a mischief for want of crossing
themselves with a good hand in the morning. Nor did they forget to apply to
Forgier's leg some fair great red medicinal grapes, and so handsomely dressed
it and bound it up that he was quickly cured.
