So much they did, and so far they went pillaging and stealing, that at last
they came to Seville, where they robbed both men and women, and took all they
could catch: nothing was either too hot or too heavy for them. Although the
plague was there in the most part of all the houses, they nevertheless entered
everywhere, then plundered and carried away all that was within, and yet for
all this not one of them took any hurt, which is a most wonderful case. For the
curates, vicars, preachers, physicians, chirurgeons, and apothecaries, who went
to visit, to dress, to cure, to heal, to preach unto and admonish those that
were sick, were all dead of the infection, and these devilish robbers and
murderers caught never any harm at all. Whence comes this to pass, my masters?
I beseech you think upon it. The town being thus pillaged, they went unto the
abbey with a horrible noise and tumult, but they found it shut and made fast
against them. Whereupon the body of the army marched forward towards a pass or
ford called the Gue de Vede, except seven companies of foot and two hundred
lancers, who, staying there, broke down the walls of the close, to waste,
spoil, and make havoc of all the vines and vintage within that place. The monks
(poor devils) knew not in that extremity to which of all their sancts they
should vow themselves. Nevertheless, at all adventures they rang the bells ad
capitulum capitulantes. There it was decreed that they should make a fair
procession, stuffed with good lectures, prayers, and litanies contra hostium
insidias, and jolly responses pro pace.  There was then in the abbey a
claustral monk, called Friar John of the funnels and gobbets, in French des
entoumeures, young, gallant, frisk, lusty, nimble, quick, active, bold,
adventurous, resolute, tall, lean, wide-mouthed, long-nosed, a fair despatcher
of morning prayers, unbridler of masses, and runner over of vigils; and, to
conclude summarily in a word, a right monk, if ever there was any, since the
monking world monked a monkery: for the rest, a clerk even to the teeth in
matter of breviary. This monk, hearing the noise that the enemy made within the
enclosure of the vineyard, went out to see what they were doing; and perceiving
that they were cutting and gathering the grapes, whereon was grounded the
foundation of all their next year's wine, returned unto the choir of the church
where the other monks were, all amazed and astonished like so many
bell-melters. Whom when he heard sing, im, nim, pe, ne, ne, ne, ne, nene, tum,
ne, num, num, ini, i mi, co, o, no, o, o, neno, ne, no, no, no, rum, nenum,
num: It is well shit, well sung, said he. By the virtue of God, why do not you
sing, Panniers, farewell, vintage is done? The devil snatch me, if they be not
already within the middle of our close, and cut so well both vines and grapes,
that, by Cod's body, there will not be found for these four years to come so
much as a gleaning in it. By the belly of Sanct James, what shall we poor
devils drink the while? Lord God! da mihi potum. Then said the prior of the
convent: What should this drunken fellow do here? let him be carried to prison
for troubling the divine service. Nay, said the monk, the wine service, let us
behave ourselves so that it be not troubled; for you yourself, my lord prior,
love to drink of the best, and so doth every honest man. Never yet did a man of
worth dislike good wine, it is a monastical apophthegm. But these responses
that you chant here, by Gâ€”, are not in season. Wherefore is it, that our
devotions were instituted to be short in the time of harvest and vintage, and
long in the advent, and all the winter? The late friar, Massepelosse, of good
memory, a true zealous man, or else I give myself to the devil, of our
religion, told me, and I remember it well, how the reason was, that in this
season we might press and make the wine, and in winter whiff it up. Hark you,
my masters, you that love the wine, Cop's body, follow me; for Sanct Anthony
burn me as freely as a faggot, if they get leave to taste one drop of the
liquor that will not now come and fight for relief of the vine. Hog's belly,
the goods of the church! Ha, no, no. What the devil, Sanct Thomas of England
was well content to die for them; if I died in the same cause, should not I be
a sanct likewise? Yes. Yet shall not I die there for all this, for it is I that
must do it to others and send them a-packing.
