Whilst the monk did thus skirmish, as we have said, against those which were
entered within the close, Picrochole in great haste passed the ford of Vede—a
very especial pass—with all his soldiers, and set upon the rock Clermond, where
there was made him no resistance at all; and, because it was already night, he
resolved to quarter himself and his army in that town, and to refresh himself
of his pugnative choler. In the morning he stormed and took the bulwarks and
castle, which afterwards he fortified with rampiers, and furnished with all
ammunition requisite, intending to make his retreat there, if he should happen
to be otherwise worsted; for it was a strong place, both by art and nature, in
regard of the stance and situation of it. But let us leave them there, and
return to our good Gargantua, who is at Paris very assiduous and earnest at the
study of good letters and athletical exercitations, and to the good old man
Grangousier his father, who after supper warmeth his ballocks by a good, clear,
great fire, and, waiting upon the broiling of some chestnuts, is very serious
in drawing scratches on the hearth, with a stick burnt at the one end,
wherewith they did stir up the fire, telling to his wife and the rest of the
family pleasant old stories and tales of former times.  Whilst he was thus
employed, one of the shepherds which did keep the vines, named Pillot, came
towards him, and to the full related the enormous abuses which were committed,
and the excessive spoil that was made by Picrochole, King of Lerne, upon his
lands and territories, and how he had pillaged, wasted, and ransacked all the
country, except the enclosure at Seville, which Friar John des Entoumeures to
his great honour had preserved; and that at the same present time the said king
was in the rock Clermond, and there, with great industry and circumspection,
was strengthening himself and his whole army. Halas, halas, alas! said
Grangousier, what is this, good people? Do I dream, or is it true that they
tell me? Picrochole, my ancient friend of old time, of my own kindred and
alliance, comes he to invade me? What moves him? What provokes him? What sets
him on? What drives him to it? Who hath given him this counsel? Ho, ho, ho, ho,
ho, my God, my Saviour, help me, inspire me, and advise me what I shall do! I
protest, I swear before thee, so be thou favourable to me, if ever I did him or
his subjects any damage or displeasure, or committed any the least robbery in
his country; but, on the contrary, I have succoured and supplied him with men,
money, friendship, and counsel, upon any occasion wherein I could be steadable
for the improvement of his good. That he hath therefore at this nick of time so
outraged and wronged me, it cannot be but by the malevolent and wicked spirit.
Good God, thou knowest my courage, for nothing can be hidden from thee. If
perhaps he be grown mad, and that thou hast sent him hither to me for the
better recovery and re-establishment of his brain, grant me power and wisdom to
bring him to the yoke of thy holy will by good discipline. Ho, ho, ho, ho, my
good people, my friends and my faithful servants, must I hinder you from
helping me? Alas, my old age required hence-forward nothing else but rest, and
all the days of my life I have laboured for nothing so much as peace; but now I
must, I see it well, load with arms my poor, weary, and feeble shoulders, and
take in my trembling hand the lance and horseman's mace, to succour and protect
my honest subjects. Reason will have it so; for by their labour am I
entertained, and with their sweat am I nourished, I, my children and my family.
This notwithstanding, I will not undertake war, until I have first tried all
the ways and means of peace: that I resolve upon.  Then assembled he his
council, and proposed the matter as it was indeed. Whereupon it was concluded
that they should send some discreet man unto Picrochole, to know wherefore he
had thus suddenly broken the peace and invaded those lands unto which he had no
right nor title. Furthermore, that they should send for Gargantua, and those
under his command, for the preservation of the country, and defence thereof now
at need. All this pleased Grangousier very well, and he commanded that so it
should be done. Presently therefore he sent the Basque his lackey to fetch
Gargantua with all diligence, and wrote him as followeth.
