Many raised their voices in suspicion against Charlotte Arlabosse, but she was
able to establish her innocence by well-nigh unassailable testimony ; besides,
she appeared too harmless and too much like a victim of Bastide's tyrannical
cruelty, to answer to the demoniacal picture of the mys- terious unknown. 

While Bach and Bousquier, in a rivalry which hastened their own ruin, tempted
the authorities to clemency by ever new inventions, and, encouraged by the
gossip which filtered through to them by subterranean channels, disturbed fur-
ther the already troubled waters ; while the soldier Colard and the Bancal
couple, owing to the rigorous confinement, the harsh treatment of the keepers,
and the excruciating hearings, were thrown into paroxysms of insanity, so that
they reported things which even Jausion, used as he was to extravagance, had to
characterize as the mere phantoms of a dream; while the other prisoners,
steering unsteadily between their actual experiences and morbid visions, con-
stantly suspected each other, and retracted today what they had sworn to
yesterday, now whined for mercy, now main- tained a defiant silence; while the
inhabitants of the city, the villages, the whole province, demanded the
termination of the long-winded procedure and the punishment of the evil-doers,
with a fanaticism whose fire was tended and fed by mysterious agents; while,
finally, the court, in the uncon- trollably increasing flood of accusations and
calumnies, lost its sense of direction, and was gradually becoming a tool in
the hands of the populace; â€” in the meanwhile the boundless forces at work
succeeded in poisoning the mind of a child, who appeared as a witness against
father and mother, and Led the deluded people to believe that God him- self had
by a miracle loosened the tongue of an infant.  Subsequently the child came to
the tavern, and at once people came forward who had heard from others, who
again had heard from third or fourth parties, that the girl had seen the old
man laid upon the table and her mother receiving money. Of course it was
ascertained by Counselor Pinaud, the only man who retained clarity and judg-
ment in the wild confusion, that Madeleine had taken pres- ents from the
managers of the tavern, as well as from other people; but it was too late by
that time to discover and extirpate the root of the lie. She was persuaded ever
more firmly into a belief of her first statement, and the recital kept
expanding the greater the attention paid her, the more her vanity was
flattered, until she believed she had really witnessed all that she related,
and she experienced a feel- ing of satisfaction in the sympathy and pity of the
grown people. Her mother had taken her to the attic, so she reported, but
fearing the cold, she had stealthily crept downstairs and hidden herself in the
bed in the alcove.  Through a hole in the curtain she could see and hear every-
thing. When the old man was about to be stabbed, the lady with the green
feather ran terrified into the room and attempted to escape through the window.
Bastide Grammont dragged her forth and wanted to kill her. Ban- cal and Colard
begged him to spare her, and she had to swear an awful oath which pledged her
to silence. A little later, Grammont, whose suspicions were not silenced, ex-
amined the bed also. Madeleine pretended to be asleep.  He felt her twice, and
then said to the mother that she must attend to getting rid of the child, which
Madame Bancal promised to do for a sum of four hundred francs. The next morning
the mother sent the child to the field, where the father had just dug a deep
hole. She thought her father meant to throw her in, but he embraced her,
weeping, and admonished her to be good.  She was dragged from her sleep at
night, in order to take advantage of her bewilderment; every new fancy was
welcomed, the girl thought she was doing something remarkable, and played her
part with increasing readiness. In such wise she molded out of nothing things
which were calculated to throw a singularly realistic light upon the fevered
image of the fateful night; for instance, how the mother had cut bread with the
same knife with which the old gentleman had been stabbed, and how Madeleine had
refused the bread, because it made her shudder ; or how the blood, caught up in
the pan, had been given to one of the pigs to drink, and how the animal had
become wild in consequence, and had rushed, screaming madly, through the yard. 

Bastide Grammont bore hearing after hearing with a cold placidity. His frigidly
haughty dignity, his mocking smile, the mute shrug of his shoulders, caused
Monsieur Jausion frequent annoyance. But there were times when, carried away by
impatience, he interrupted the judge outright, and attacked, boldly and
eloquently, the frail yet indestructible structure of the evidence. 

"If it was my intention and interest to do away with my uncle, did it require a
conspiracy of so many people? " he asked, his face blazing with scorn. "Am I
supposed to have such a combination of craft and stupidity as to ally myself
with brothel-keepers, harlots, smugglers, old women, and convicted criminals,
people who would, as long as I live, remain my masters and blackmailers, even
supposing silence to be among their virtues? Can anything more senseless be
imagined than to seize a man on an open road and drag him into a house known to
})e suspicions? Why all this elaborate plot? Did no better occasion offer
itself to me? Could I not have enticed the old man to the estate, shot him and
buried him in the woods? 
