They would be bound to turn up and expose me. You say yourself that the Ban-
cal house is dilapidated, that one can look into Bancal's room from the
Spaniards' dwelling through the rotten boards ; why, then, did Monsieur
Saavedra hear nothing .' Aha, he slept! A sound sleep, that. Or is he likewise,
in the conspiracy, like my mother, my sister, my sweetheart, my faithful
servants! And admitting all, were not the Bancal couple sufficient to help kill
a feeble old man and dispose of his body; did I have to fetch half a dozen sus-
picious fellows, besides, from the taverns? Why did not my uncle cry out? He
was gagged ; well and good ; but the gag was found in the yard. Then he did
scream, after all, when the gag was removed, and I had the organ-grinders play.
But such organs are noisy and draw people to the windows and into the street.
And why butcher the victim, since so many strong men could easily have
strangled him?  Show me the medical report, Monsieur, does it not speak of a
gash rather than a stab? And what twaddle, that about the funeral train, what
betraying arrangements in a country where every sign-post has eyes ! I am
accused of having rushed into my uncle 's house the following day and stolen
some papers. Where are those papers? My uncle died almost poor. His claim
against me was transferred to President Seguret. Why, then, the deed? What do
they want with me ? Who that has eyes sees my hands stained ? ' This language
was defiant. It aroused the displeasure of the court and increased the hatred
of the multitude, whom it reached in garbled shape. Through fear of the people,
no lawyer dared undertake Bastide Grammont's defense. Monsieur Pinaud, who
alone had the courage to point out the improbabilities and the fantastic origin
of most of the testimony, came near paying with his life for his zeal for
truth. One night a mob, including some peas- ants, marched to his house,
smashed his windows, demol- ished the gate, and set fire to the steps. The
terrified man made his escape with difficulty, and fled to Toulouse.  Bastide
Grammont clearly recognized that, for the pres- ent, it was useless to offer
any resistance; he determined, therefore, to transform all his valor into
patience and keep his lips closed as if they were doors through which his hopes
might take flight. He, the freest of men, had to pass the radiant spring days,
the fragrant summer nights, in a damp hole which rendered one's own breath
offensive; he, to whom animals spoke, for whom flowers had eyes, the the earth
at times a semblance of the glow of love, who walked, strode, roamed, rode, as
artists produce enchanting creations â€” he was condemned by the perverse play of
in- comprehensible circumstances to a foretaste of the grave and deprived of
what he held dearest and most precious.  Frequent grew the nights of sullenness
when his eyes, brim- ming over with tears, were dulled at the thought of dis-
grace; more frequent the days of irrepressible longing, when every grain of
sand that crumbled from the moist walls was a reminder of the wondrous being
and working of the earth, the meadow, the wood. From the events which had
overshadowed his life he turned away his thoughts in disgust, and he scarcely
heard the keeper when he appeared one morning and exultingly informed him that
the mys- terious unknown, who was destined to become the chief witness, the
lady with the green feathers, had finally been found; she had come forward of
her own accord, and she was the daughter of President Seguret, Clarissa
Mirabel. 

Bastide Grammont gazed gloomily before him. But from that hour that name
hovered about his ears like the flutter- ing of the wings of inevitable Fate.
This is what took place : Madame Mirabel confessed that on the night of the
murder she had been in the Bancal house.  This confession, however, was made
under a peculiar stress, and in less time than it took swift Rumor to make it
public, she retracted everything. But the word had fallen and bred deed upon
deed. 

Clarissa Mirabel was the only child of President Seguret.
