She knew nothing about Bastide Graminont. Neverthe- less, his name, as soon as
she heard it, fell like a weight upon her watchful soul. She began to make
inquiries about him, ventured upon secret rides to La Morne, and led one or
another of his servants to talk about him; nay, once she even succeeded in
speaking with Charlotte Arlabosse, who was free again at that time. What she
learned aroused a strange, pained astonishment ; she had a feeling of having
missed an important meeting. 

In addition, she suddenly remembered having seen him.  It must have been he, if
she but half comprehended the confused descriptions of his person. It was a
year ago, one early morning in the first days of spring. Seized by the general
unrest with which the vernal season stirs the blood and rouses the sleeper
sooner than his wont, she had wandered from the chateau, over the vine-clad
hills, into the woody vale of Rolx. And as she strode through the dewy
underbrush glistening with sunshine, above her the warbling of birds and the
glowing blue of the celestial dome, beneath her the earth breathing like a
sentient being, she caught sight of a man of powerful build who was stand- ing
erect, bareheaded, with nose in the air, and was enjoy- ing with a
preternatural eagerness, with distended gaze, all that lay open for enjoyment â€”
the scents, the sun, the intoxicating dewiness, the splendor of the heavens. He
seemed to scent it all, sniffing like a dog or a deer, and while his upturned
face bore an expression of unfettered, smiling satisfaction, his arms, hanging
by his side, trembled as in a spasm. 

She was frightened then ; she fled without his perceiving her, without his
hearing the sound of her footsteps. Now the picture assumed a different
significance.  And one night he came riding on a wild steed, forced his way
into the castle, took her and rode away with her so swiftly that it seemed as
if the storm was his servant, and lent wings to his steed.  When the talk at
table or in company turned upon Bastide Grammont and his murderous crime, of
which no one stood in doubt, Clarissa never occupied herself with the enormity
of the deed, which must forever separate such a man from the fellowship of the
good. Enveloped in a voluptuous mist, she was sensible of the influence of his
compelling- force, of the heroic soul that spoke in his gestures, of the
reality of his existence and the possibility of a close approach to the figure
which persisted in haunting her troubled dreams. She was frightened at herself
; she gazed into the dreaded depths of her soul, and she often felt as if she
herself were lying in prison and Bastide were walk- ing back and forth outside,
planning means for forcing the door, while his swift steed was neighing in
triumph. 

Now she was entangled in all the talk, whisperings, and tales, and the whole
mass of abominations, too, in which design and arbitrariness were hopelessly
mingled, passed, steadily growing, before her. The thing had an increas- ingly
strange effect upon her, and she felt as if she were breathing poisoned air;
she would walk through one of the streets of Rodez and fancy that all eyes were
fastened upon her in accusation, so that she hastened her steps, hurried home,
pale and confused, and gazed at herself in the mirror with faltering pulse. 

She had recently been entertained at the estate of a family on terms of
friendship with her father. One day the master of the house, a scholar, was
thrown into great agitation over the loss of a valuable manuscript. The
servants were ordered to ransack every room, but no one was suspected of theft.
