At home she lapsed into a peculiar state. First she lay back lethargically in a
chair ; suddenly she sprang up and cried : ' ' Take away the murderers ! ' '
The door opened and the terrified face of a servant ap- peared in the crack.
All the domestics stood waiting in the hall, most of them resolved to leave the
President's service.  Clarissa saw herself deprived of all the protection of
love, and cast out from the circle where birth is respected and binding forms
are recognized as the least of duties. She was exposed to every 7 eye, the
boldest gaze could pry into her inmost soul, she had become a public object,
nothing about her was any longer her own, she herself could no longer find
herself, find anything in herself upon which she could lean, she was branded,
without and within, food for the general prurience, tossed defenselessly upon
the filthy floods of gossip, the centre of a fearful occurrence from which she
could no more dissever her thoughts. Sad- ness, grief, anxiety, scorn, these
were no longer feelings for her, her blood coursed too wildly for that ;
uncertainty of herself dominated her, doubts as to her perception, doubts as to
visible things in general; and now and then she would prick her finger with a
needle just to feel the pain, which would serve as evidence of her being awake
and might preserve her heart from decay. Added to this, the torment she
suffered from the intrusive : appeals to tell the truth, the jeers from below,
the command from above, the thirst for revenge and the ineffaceableness of a
word once spoken; lastly, she saw the whole world filled with red tongues,
ceaselessly chattering; bloody tongues with snakeliko movements, directed
toward her; every object she touched turned into a slippery tongue. Human
counte- nances grew dim, save one, which, despite guilt and con- demnation, was
enthroned, in heroic suffering, high above the others, nay, appeared preeminent
through his guilt as well as his defiance. And the day she was told that sli< i
was to confront Bastido Orammont in order to accuse him, her pulses beal in
joyous measure again for the first time, and she arrayed herself as if tor a
festival.  The meeting was to take place in the magistrate's office.  Besides
Monsieur Jausion and his clerks, Counselor Pinaud, who had returned, was
present. Monsieur Jausion cast a malicious glance at him over his spectacles as
Clarissa Mirabel, decked in lace, rustled in, bowed smiling to the gentlemen,
and then swept her gaze with cheerful calmness over the inhospitable room. From
a frame in the centre of the wall the fat and ill-humored face of the King
looked down upon her, as ill-humored as if each one of his subjects were
especially repugnant to him. She forgot that it was only a picture that hung
before her and looked up with a coquettish pout. 

The magistrate made a sign, a side-door was thrown open, and Bastide Grammont,
with hands chained together and with an officer of justice on either side of
him, walked in. Clarissa gave a low cry and her face turned livid. 

Prison atmosphere enveloped Bastide. The shaggy hair, the long, neglected
beard, the staring, somewhat dazed look, the slight stoop, as of a carrier of
burdens, of the gigantic form, the secretly quivering wrath upon his newly
furrowed brow â€” all proclaimed their cause and origin. Yes, he seemed to carry
about him the invisible walls which filled him with agony and gloom, and which,
month after month, pictured to him with more and more hopeless brilliance the
images of freedom, until finally they refused to delude him with blooming tree
or flourishing field; then they re- sembled the desolate gray of an autumn
evening, when the air already smacks of winter, the hearse rattles oftener than
usual past the garden-gate toward the little church- yard, and the rising
half-moon floats in glowing radiance in the misty azure like a bleeding,
divided heart. 

And yet that haughty eye, in which shone the resolve to be true to himself! And
yet that strangely bitter scorn in his mien which might be compared to the
cautious and at the same time majestic crouching of a tiger cat? The in- finite
contempt with which he looked at the hands of the clerks, prepared to write,
his inner freedom and grand detachment in spite of the handcuffs and the two
soldiers?
