He heard the sentence of death when the court returned; he had risen, and
listened to the words of the presiding judge; it sounded like the splashing of
raindrops on withered leaves. He heard himself say something, but what it was
he hardly knew. He saw many faces turned toward him in the dim light, and they
gave him the impression of worm-eaten and decaying apples. 

The verdict concerning the other accused persons was not to be announced until
the following day. The crowds in the hall, in the entrances, and on the street,
dispersed slowly. When Clarissa passed through the corridor every one stepped
timidly aside. 

She had learned that Bastide was not to be taken back to Rodez, but was to
remain in the prison at Alby. She thereupon dismissed the carriage that was
waiting for her, betook herself to an inn near by, where she asked for a room,
and wrote a letter to her father â€” a few feverishly agitated sentences : "I
know no longer what is truth and what is falsehood ; Bastide is innocent, and I
have destroyed him, though my desire was to help him; Yes and No are in my
breast like two extinguished flames; if I were to return whence I came I should
suffer a continual death; for that reason and because people live as they do, I
go where I must." It was already past midnight when she asked to speak to the
host. She requested him to send the letter in the morning to Chateau Perrie by
a reliable mes- senger; she then asked the startled man to sell her a small
basket of fresh fruit. The host expressed a polite regret that ho had nothing
more in his storeroom. Passionately urgent, she offered him ten, twentyfold its
value and threw a gold piece on the table. " It is for a dying person," she
said, " everything depends upon it." Left alone, she knelt down by the bedside,
buried her face in the pillows and wept. After half an hour the host returned,
carrying a basket full of pears, grapes, pome- granates, and peaches. Shaking
his head, he followed her with his eyes as she hastened away, and held the
sealed letter, which he was to forward, inquisitively up to the light. 

The streets were desolate and bathed in shadowy moon- light. The windows of the
little houses were blinking drowsily; under a gateway stood the night-watchman
with a halberd and mumbled like a drunken man. In front of the low prison
building there was an open space ; Clarissa seated herself on a stone bench,
and, as there was a pump near by and she felt thirsty, drank her fill. The
softly swelling outlines of the hills melted almost imperceptibly into the sky,
and behind a depression in the landscape a fire-light was glowing ; she seemed
to hear, too, on listening intently, the ringing of bells. The whole world was
not asleep, then, and she could link her anxious heart to human concerns once
more. After a time she rose, stepped over to the building, set the basket of
fruit on the ground, and knocked with the knocker at the gate. It was a long
while before the door-keeper appeared and gruffly demanded what she wanted. " I
must speak to Bastide Grammont," she declared. The man made a face as if a
demented per- son had waylaid him, growled in a threatening tone and was about
to bang the door in her face. Clarissa clutched his arm with one hand, and tore
the diamond brooch from her breast with the other. "There, there, there!" she
stammered. The old man raised his lantern and examined the sparkling jeweled
ornament on all sides. Clarissa misinterpreted his grinning, anxious joy,
thought he was not satisfied, and gave him her purse into the bargain.  " What
is in the basket? " he inquired respectfully but suspiciously. She showed him
what it contained. 
