Inside Clarissa clung to the wall to give her riotous pulses time to subside.
The room seemed moderately large and not altogether uninhabitable. Bastide lay
on a pallet along the opposite wall, asleep and fully dressed.  " What a
stillness!" thought Clarissa shuddering, and stole softly to the bedside of the
sleeping man. What quiet in that countenance, too, what a beautiful slumber,
thought she, and her lips parted in mute sorrow. She placed the lantern on the
floor where its light would strike his face, then she knelt down and listened
to his steady breathing. Bastide r s mouth was firmly closed, his eyelids were
motionless, a sign of dreamlessness ; his long beard encircled cheeks and chin
like brown brushwood, his head was thrown slightly backward, and his hair shone
with a moist gleam. Gradually the peace of his countenance passed into Clarissa
too ; all words, all signs which she had brought with her vanished, she
determined to do nothing more than place her gift by his bed and depart.
Accord- ingly she emptied the basket, and started and paused every time she
heard but a grain of sand crunch under her feet.  When she had laid out all the
fruit and passed her hand tenderly over each, she grew more and more peaceful
and calm ; she felt herself so strangely bound to death that she dismissed the
thought of leaving this room with a feeling akin to fear, and prepared to do
what possessed her so strongly, with a composed assurance.  Bastide still slept
on, that abysmal sleep where total oblivion chains and numbs body and spirit.
Then he began to dream. He found himself in a spacious, secluded cham- ber, the
centre of which was occupied by a richly decked table. Many people were seated
around it; they were carousing and having a merry time. Suddenly all eyes were
turned to the middle of the table, where a vessel of opaque blue glass, which
had not been there before, now stood. What was in the glass receptacle? what
could it signify? who brought it? was asked in muffled tones.  Thereupon an
uncanny silence ensued; all gazed now at the blue vessel, now, with sullen
suspicion, at each other.  All at once, the jovial revelers of a few moments
ago arose and one accused the other of having placed the covered dish on the
table. A violent clamor now arose, some drew their poniards, others swung
chairs about, and meanwhile a slim, nude girl's figure was seen to emerge, like
white smoke, from the vessel on the table. Bastide knew the face, it was that
of the false witness Clarissa ; with snake- like glistening eyes she gazed at
him, always only at him.  All the men followed her glance and they hurled
themselves upon him.  Here he awoke. His first drowsy glance fell upon the
flickering light of the lantern, the second upon a huge pear, which, yellow as
a rising moon, lay at his bedside. In dazed, joyous astonishment he grasped it,
but on raising it to his lips noticed that it was stained with blood. He was
startled, thought he was still dreaming. Beyond the windows the gray light of
dawn was already spreading.  Now he caught sight of the other fruit, gorgeous
and abun- dant, as if paradise had been pillaged. But all was stained with
blood ... A little rivulet of blood, divided into two streams, trickled over
from the corner of the wall.  Bitter and wild grief wrung his breast. He longed
no more for the day which awoke so drearily outside; weary of his own
heart-beats and perfectly sure of what had hap- pened and must happen, he
yearned for the final end. He desired no special knowledge of the consummated
fate of the being on the other side of the cell, who, dominated by mysterious
spirits, had trust herself into his path â€” no knowledge of men and what they
built or destroyed. Man was an abomination to him. 

And yet when his glance fell upon the splendid fruit once more, he felt the woe
of all creation; he wished at least to close the eyes of the giver. But just
then the keeper, grown suspicious, turned the key in the lock.
