Very soon the peaceful quiet, in which seven happy years of Wolfgang's life had
passed, should give place to the clangour of a war not to cease until seven
more years were gone, a war sundering native city, and even family, into two
almost hostile camps. Grandfather Textor, who had supported the canopy over the
Emperor and received from the Empress a golden chain, stood with the larger
part of the council on the Imperial side j Councillor Goethe and the burghers
were for Prussia.  Alas! Vienna influence had gained over the governing body in
Frankfurt; while its people desired the neutrality, which was in accordance
with Frederick's wishes, and by which the town would be spared not only the
contribution of soldiers to the Imperial cause, but the march through of French
reinforce- ments. Each man in high office looked for an ample share of favours
from the Emperor,â€”from the "rebellious" King of Prussia what could be hoped! On
the outbreak of the war, the Council immediately forbade the publication and
dis- tribution of political pamphlets; and required that "every one should
attend to his business and calling, withholding himself from discussion and
pronouncing opinions." This was meant to bridle in the citizens with their
Prussian leanings, but it only made the general mood more bitter, without
restraining it from expression. Frankfurt booksellers, despite the Council,
pub- lished praises of the heroic Prussian King whom they honoured.  With great
delight he copied out the war-songs of the day, and he enjoyed still more the
satirical rhymes about the Emperor, which, dull as they were, made a vivid
impression on him. That a whole league of nations arose against Frederick, made
the sympathy of the enthusiastic boy the more irresistible, and when there was
news of victory, his rapture rose the higher to think of the odds overcome.
Alas! Kollin followed close on Prague.3 Beside his father's zealous instruction
Wolfgang began to have some schooling away from home with other children.  At a
later time he, perhaps by his father's desire, selected for preservation a
number of exercises then written which he labelled Jugendarbeiten (Labores
juveniles). Of these the earliest, belonging to January 1757, are short themes,
com- posed in German, then translated into Latin. These "exercitia privata,"
which are quite childish in their style and have several positive mistakes,
must be altogether Wolfgang's own.  To the same January belongs the first of
three conversations written in German and then turned into Latin. These also
can hardly have originated with the father, they seem too light and humorous
for the stern serious man, they correspond well to the character of the lively
boy. The first in order, which is probably the earliest, is the happy turning
of a real incident.  Wolfgang, when his father went to the cellar for wine, had
wished to go too; he wanted to see once more the foundation- stone laid two
years ago. His father prescribed to him as a theme the development of a
conversation about this, and he was then to make Latin of it; the final fair
copy has come down to us. Wolfgang was delighted with the opportunity of
exhibiting his knowledge.  Great skill in the turnings and bright playfulness
are displayed in this dialogue. The second and third cannot be of much later
date. In one the father will not hear of his son's making animals of wax; the
small artist may praise to the skies the work of his hands; the father can see
nothing but childish nonsense, it is wasting good wax; the figures prove one
thing at any rate, that their maker does not know beauty from ugliness. When
the son expresses a wish to be taught, the reply is that his eyes must grow a
little older first. In the third dialogue, Wolfgang and Maximilian enter; it is
doubtful who is meant by the latter name. There was a Friedrich Maximilian, son
of the Sheriff and Biirgermeister Moors, who lived near the Goethes, but if it
were this boy, a younger brother of his, born on the same day with Wolfgang,
would hardly have been left out. Wolfgang had wished to come some time before
the Latin lesson which they both re- ceived at Maximilian's home, but alas! he
has been delayed in laying the dinner-table and in other preparations for a
visit Maximilian thinks it strange that his friend is not invited to this
entertainment by his parents, but, as a dutiful son, Wolf- gang refuses to
consider the matter closely. Maximilian will hear nothing of all the devices
proposed by Wolfgang for pass- ing the time before the lesson-hour. He cannot
bring himself to peruse the Praxis declinationum et conjugationum of Speccius
nor the Orbis picttts of Comenius; even an edition of the last- named in four
languages with the German, Latin, Italian, and French names of things, is
without charm to him. He pro- poses fencing or wrestling; Wolfgang, half from
childish caprice, half from fear of the sudden arrival of the master, rejects
his proposals, and here the conversation ceases. What pleasant peeps into that
home-life! It may be noted that in his German composition the boy has in mind
the introduction of certain Latin idioms. In our bundle of manuscript we see
too that his father often dictated suitable stories of the time for trans-
lation into Latin; but indeed Wolfgang of his own accord did exercises of all
kinds. 
