That "The Life and Death of Socrates " remained an un- realised plan was not
due so much to Herder's long silence as to the intractability of the material,
to pre-occupation with the Review, and to a life spent more and more in
society.  Towards the close of the year (1771) appeared a collection of
Klopstock's Odes, the first which he himself published. Goethe was familiar
already with the most important of them, though in not quite the same form;
those on religious subjects inter- ested him little; the bardic garb he liked
not at all; he was not moved by the excessive Fatherland and "Cidli" enthusi-
asm of others. It is true that he recognised the strength of the well-wrought
periods, the culmination of art in the verse, and by sympathetic reading aloud
strove to illustrate these their merits; still he could not but deal them hard
measure while Greek poetry was such a passion to him. Let us remember, too, how
in his Gotz he had just been making the last German knight live and move again
(not to the advantage of the Holy Roman Empire of the German nation), and we
shall realise what a watery dream this shapeless Bardenthum must have seemed.
The primary effect of Klopstock's volume was to make him a skating enthusiast;
he used, as he swept over the ice, to make the night air ring with passages
from Der Eislauf and Braga, and (probably) the two other Ice Odes. He trained
himself to skate in a place where he was alone, and then invited others to join
him.  At the beginning of March 1772 he went with Schlosser for a few days'
visit to Merck, in Darmstadt; and to Merck's kindly sympathy the young poet
opened all his heart He had at length overcome the grief for Friederike, and
revealed himself on this trip in his extraordinary, all-bewitching loveable-
ness; but he watched to prevent his too sensitive heart from any new passion.
Herder's betrothed, Caroline Flachsland, who was stopping with her sister, the
wife of Privy Councillor (GehdmeratH) Hesse, met him on two afternoons and at a
dinner; she writes to Herder:â€”"Goethe is a good-hearted, cheery mortal, without
any learned adornment; he finds a great deal of occupation and interest in
Merck's children. . . .  The first afternoon was spoiled by a game of Trisett
and two visitors. Only one moment Goethe, my sister, and I sat together in the
afternoon sunshine, which was lovely, and talked of you. . . . The second
afternoon we spent in a pleasant walk, and in the house over a bowl of punch.
We were not sentimental, but very gay, and Goethe and I danced minuets to piano
music; and then he repeated for us an excellent ballad of yours that I never
heard before " (the Scotch ballad Edward). "At my request, often repeated, he
sent me a copy of it the day after his return to Frankfurt; but he wrote no
letter. Herr Schlosser is good, very good; only he has a little too much
society varnish. He likes me very much; and more, I think, than Goethe, which
however I regret In one of his letters to Merck he has talked of me through six
lines long. They will come again in the summer." He had now become so
thoroughly at home again in his Frankfurt life, and at the same time had found
such an inspiring circle of friends in Darmstadt, that he fell into a silence
towards those whom he had left in Strassburg, even towards Salzmann and Jung.
Not that the image of either friend was effaced, it was rather hidden away
beneath the cares and interests of his stirring intellectual and social life.
Spring advancing awakened afresh his delight in song. The power of Niederbronn
was on him when he wrote the dialogue, Der Wanderer; in which there is a moving
plaint over the destruc- tion in modern days of the relics of antique art that
have survived the former storms.1 Herder's betrothed writes that it is an
excellent poem of a hut built amid the ruins of an ancient temple. About the
middle of April (1772) Goethe, going to Darmstadt on foot, was overtaken by a
violent storm, which for some time he calmly permitted to do its worst; at
last, quite exhausted by its force, he sought shelter in a cottage.  On this
occasion he spoke aloud, as he used to repeat the Ice Odes of Klopstock,
dithyrambic verses about the might of the great Genius who lifts him above the
commonplace condi- tions of life, surrounding him with warmth and purity; of
the great sweeping force and rage of Pindar, how unlike to the pleasant voices
of Theocritus and Anacreon, that lull the charmed heart.
